Counter-Principals, or demonstrations of the absense of specific biases.

While it seems to be the case that humans having minds constituted by all the states and process that make them up, and posessing the specific faculties they happen to, are biased to percieving certain kinds of things in particular relations as having subjective unity, there are naturally many ways of arranging things such that they cause experiences that feel like they should result in particular unities, but which for whatever reason do not, and seem not to for pracically everyone.

An interesting example of this is the possibility of hearing a melody, and the hearing a retrograde 'variation' (or candidate transformation) of that melody and percieving it as a closely related thematic transformation of the melody. This is something that, from a practical, computational perspective, doesn't seem like it whould be all that difficult for the human mind to do. In a sense, it might even be reasonable to conjecture that, since the human mind is naturally capable of percieving center embedding in language, a person with EVP is capable of using the resources of the language processing components of the mind to percieve similar kinds of structures in music, and people with SGP are capable of percieving 'reversals' of structure such as melodic inversions as being closely related to their opposite forms, that perception of retrograde variations of themes should naturally arise out of all of these combinations of factors.

But it seems that, for the vast majority of people who have EVP and SGP at least, this doesn't happen. There are numerous people who have claimed to experience retrograde (and retrograde inversion) as being structurally significant; possibly Schoenburg, etc LIST THEM HERE. However, significant numbers of otherwise 'competent' listeners seem to report attaching no signifficance to retrograde transformations of themes, e.g. they perceive themes played backward note-wise (without necessarily being altered in any other way) to be distant and unrelated to the unmodified theme, as opposed to being similar and unified like other canonical transformations. It may be the case that there exists an additonal, hypothetical, modal faculty which enables the hearing of instances of retrograde themes as variations of each other, which may also explain the inability to percieve the structure of 'atonal' serialist works.