Vitalistic and conceptual metaphors almost certainly share many of the same qualities. They are each (by myself and by others, whether explicitly or implicitly) called metaphors, and so are rightly considered the same class of phenomena in a general sense. However, given how I believe that vital metaphors have characteristic properties that can distinguish them from the conceptual, or that the faculties underlying vitalistic immagination can likewise be distinguished, then I feel that this can be used to critisise a potential  converse opinion, which is that all metaphor might be, in a sense, merely a weaker or more limited form of the full blown vital, but still containing the fundumental characteristics of the vital, only in a smaller capacity, rather than something that can exist independently of these qualities.

This converse opinion or position, may be compared to the idea that all metaphors share, in vitality, the equivilent of what a single hue is to color perception, but to different degrees (i.e. different shades/saturations, representing the degree of vitality). My opinion, however, is that vital metaphors may involve the equivilent of an entirely different hue to regular metaphor, a perceptual quality which may be added and mixed in (and which, in essense, allows forms of color mixing that are otherwise not possible), but which a given person/consciousness may effectivly be 'colorblind' to. To extend this anaology, both kinds of color variation may be perceived as something with continuous qualities, i.e. shades of a color potentially allow arbitrarily minute and numerous distinctuons, but different hues, while still allowing similar continuity betwen them, may be percieved as starkly distinct *kinds* of color, and certain classes of hues as a whole may be absent in a given person if they happen to be appropriately color blind.

As such, while both kinds of metaphor may well share many of the same underlying mechanisms, and maybe the only real quality distinguishing the vitalistic imagination is that is offers a structured, dynamic 'buffer' that is acessable to consciousness that merely conceptual metaphors do not, and on top of the same underlying mental forces. But, if this is so, a fundumental distinction still exists and will be in principal apparent to perception.