There is an important aspect of musical apprehension that need to be understood if we are to explore how a given mind is able to build up musical structure. That is how the impression of a tonal center arises and what actually causes it to be perceived as an unresolved tension.

First off, I will make it clear that to my knowledge, there are so far no definite, absolute structural principals which would allow an algorithm to explicitly determine that a sequence of notes should in principal cause a given person to perceive those notes as build up a sense of tension around a given key. This is important, because all mechanical key prediction techniques seem to rely on statistics, machine learning and various methods of approximation that pick up estimations of patterns, but which lack any definite, theoretical core aside from that of human intuition. However, if we assume we can collectively judge our own internal sense of tonality and, in describing it to others, figure out to what extent a given description of a species^1 of tonal experience matches up to our own experience, for a given piece of music, then we should be able to gauge what aspects of that experience we share in common.

^1 The term species used here is something I intend to delineate in very specific ways shortly.

Much existing music theory implicitly assumes that the mind attempting to engage with it possesses certain qualities in common with that of the writer, and that they will basically be able to comprehend the music and ideas discussed in the same general way that they do, or if not, that this can be 'corrected' be engaging in appropriate study in much the same way that the study of anything else might allow the student to grasp a given subject. But in a certain way, I am claiming that this is not quite the case. Rather, it seems to be that minds, in apprehending music, will experience it in fundamentally different ways, such that the only way the minds can be made the same with regard to the kind of experience is to radically alter at least one of the individual minds so that the discreet form of mental processing they undergo matches up with the other. Only then a more or less complete understanding be properly reconciled in full. So, in a way, it seems to be possible that just about any individual can actually 'learn' to comprehend music according to the common understanding a given body of work assumes, but the nature of the learning process is possibly radically different from what we ordinarily think of as learning, as a sustained and gradual process as opposed to a series of discreet stages that are potentially triggered by outside stimuli.

The degree to which methods of musical training themselves actually stimulate the development of the modal faculties, and the degree which the faculties themselves explicitly rely on training to form, are open questions that will need to be studied in much greater detail in order to be better understood. It may well be that no explicit training at all is necessary for the activation of the faculties; many people have reported experiences^2 which imply that they have possessed both EVP and SGP from a young age, before engaging in any training that might have triggered their development. Because of this, it is feasibly possible that someone at any given age, and from any given background, may or may not have possession of a given faculty, and hence my or may not be capable of having a given species of tonal experience.

Now I will begin to describe the specific nature of various tonal species as I have experienced them, explaining how it is that the nature or a given experience is contingent on the modal faculties one possesses.

Intertonal: Intertonal passages of music are what I have experienced as the foundation of tonality, as what is fundamental to tonal music before the additional possibilities supplied by SGP are enabled by its power. To an EVA-SGN, intertonal passages will entirely comprise their whole experience of tonality, they will not experience any sense that music is "in a key", that there is a need to return to a particular tonic in order to resolve a feeling of tension, without it being an 'intertonal' experience of tonality. I will define the qualities of experiencing a passage as being intertonal through the following criteria:

A musical theme of sufficient length in order to create the expectation of a return to a tonic is perceived. To illustrate what this is not, I will contrast this with something insufficient; a short three note sequence comprising of simply a tonic, mediant and dominant. This can outline a harmony of a major scale, but will not itself create a direct experience of there being an unresolved tension, unless it is further elaborated on (an example of which can be seen in the opening of Bach's Violin Concerto in E Major). That tonal tension is experienced as being through a specific theme is essential to this definition of intertonality. EVA-SGNs will not experience tonal tension of any kind at all without this feeling being formed through the expression of a specific theme, experienced through a single 'voice' (musical line) - though with an intertonal experience, multiple 'voices' may be perceived together, each having their own tonal center, each generally resolving into an ultimate chord that consists of the union of the tonic of each voice. ^Harmonic

A feeling of tension (which is comprised by the above mentioned expectation to return to a tonic) is created through this by having part of the theme composed in such a way that it will feel dissonant^4 if the listener does not use their language faculty in order to reinterpret this dissonance as an incompleteness, such that the passage of music feels that has simply not yet been finished and would be consonant only if it were to be completed. This requires EVPA. EVPNs are, in contrast, not capable of performing this act of reinterpreting dissonance as incompleteness/anticipation of further resolution. This anticipation of completeness will naturally cause the listener to feel a need to resolve to a specific tonic, namely what is experienced as the key of the passage.

This will be felt in a specific way. It is important to understand that everything I am describing here will be actively felt as part of the experience of intertonality, barely anything here is an abstraction derived from reasoning about a collection of such experiences after the fact, but rather should mostly be clearly apparent to someone experiencing it directly. When you feel a passage of music as possessing intertonality, you will feel "in the back of your mind" that there is a clear and unambiguous need to return to a very particular note, and save for this return to the tonal center the whole passage will feel incomplete and dissatisfying. If this is not felt (and it should be clear if it is) then chances are that you are not experiencing music intertonally, either because you aren't listening to appropriate music, you have not yet been able to parse a given passages as being a given theme (which is especially crucial for EVA-SGNs and will be explored in more detail shortly), you lack EVP, or you possess SGP in addition to EVP and hence have more freedom to mentally "break the rules" of music that would otherwise be perceived wholly intertonally. Importantly, even if you can't name the specific key or understand how it is constructed, you should at least in principal be able to hum the note that would be the tonic or end point if you are physically able to do so.^3

Now, this definition of intertonality will in itself not be that useful unless definitions of other types of tonal and non-tonal (and possibly ambiguously tonal) music are given in contrast. As I have hinted, it is possible to experience tonal tension through other species of tonality, but in intertonality this will occur only strictly through instances of themes which are canonical sequences. The very idea of tonal tension, which is the key to the idea of the tonal center/tonality, is itself a generalization of intertonality. But I've chosen to cover the specific category of intertonality first in order to provide a concrete basis of experience for comparison.

The works of CPE Bach exemplifies music that can be experienced intertonally. The reason for this, is that most works on the classical repertoire contain substantial structure based around variant addition that will pull away from returning to the tonal center of the work in favor of partially repeating sections of thematic material, which is generally annoyingly unsatisfying for EVA-SGNs (who are the primary 'audience' for intertonal experience, as SGPAs will have the capacity to experience tonality in way that transcend it). CPE Bach's concertos, along with many works in jazz and progressive rock, will, instead of building up monumental architectural structures, choose to more frequently 'pass through' the tonic, before quickly moving on to the next musical phrase in succession.

Contratonal: So, in order to contrast with the experience of music as being tonal, I'll introduce the concept of 'contra-tonal' musical experience. This idea is distinct from intertonality, as it specifically refers to the experience of kinds of music which can be comprehended as being satisfying to listen to without necessarily being perceived as having a tonal center, such that it actually is perceived as lacking a tonal center and any kind of 'pseudo-tonal' tension (meaning it is not perceived as having variant structure). This category induces the apprehension of certain kinds of music that could, optionally, be perceived as having a tonal center, but specifically discludes intertonal music (that will only be appreciated by those who possess EVP and who actively listen to the tension and release generated by the development of a theme through to the return to the tonic at a cadence).  Prelude 1 in C major of J.S. Bach's WTC Book 1 is a prime example of music of this sort, there is no barrier to the perception of it as being harmonious, consonant and satisfying (though the music itself may be felt to sound naive) even without EVP. Contratonal experience is naturally how EVN-SGN listeners perceive music that they don't perceive to be dissatisfying due to excessive structural demands.

Supertonal: This category (the contratonal) relates to a further species of experience that is in turn defined in contrast to it, that of the 'super-tonal'. Super-tonal experience is one where, a person possessing both EVP and SGP is able to interpret music that might otherwise be experienced as being 'contra-tonal' as having a tonal center. This is achieved through the capability (via SGP and variant structure) of piecing together melodic fragments within a musical work (which themselves do not form distinct themes that are sufficient in structure as to be intertonal) such that they end up creating the perception of a tonal center and structures of tension around it . Not all contra-tonal perceptible works will super-tonal perceptible, nor will all super-tonal perceptible works be contra-tonal perceptible. The WTC book 1 prelude also serves as a supertonal work to those who are capable of perceiving it as such.

Pseudo-X: This concept of 'pseudo-tonality' is one I must introduce carefully. It doesn't refer to any one specific type of experience, but rather is used as a way of contrasting a variety of musical experiences that aren't considered to be traditionally tonal, but which share particular aspects in common with certain species of 'properly' tonal experience. For example, what is commonly (but unfortunately) termed 'atonal' music is potentially covered by this broad portmanteau category, specifically as a kind of pseudo-supertonal music that is non-contratonal. Certain non-contratonal music can be experienced as pseudo-supertonal via the listener possessing SGP, given that the music is structured so as to provide repetitive patterns that allow the music to be experienced as a kind of variant structure layered over a base structure that may allow canonical transformation, but which is deliberately composed to as to not lead the ear to perceive a single specific key tension. ^ambiguity


These categories should allow me to discuss the nature of how different listeners will experience different kinds of works.

I've established numerous times that EVPAs will not perceive tonal tension at all, though their perception of a given 'part' of a piece of music -individual notes, bars and sections- will be influenced by the surrounding context in respect to the beat patterns and scales used and the emotions that are evoked. EVPAs may still perceive a certain phenomena that may be called tension, namely the feeling of a verse section of a song progressing towards a chorus, but this is distinct from tonal tension that 'demands' a specific candential resolution. This lack of candential demand allows much pop/rock music to fade out at the end instead of needing to explicitly resolve any built up structure.

EVA-SGN listeners will be capable of perceiving tonality through intertonality,  but there are certain important limitations they will experience beyond the structural implications of not being able to cognize variant structure. One of these is that, in comparison to what an EVA-SGA ought to be capable of, the SGN listener will have a much greater need to memorize and commit to long term memory the individual themes in a given piece of tonal music. EVA-SGNs may be able to get a feel for the themes of a given tonal work, even if it contains significant variant structure, by repeated listening to a piece. In doing so they may, over time, progressively get a better feel for both what the themes are, and also get better at identifying how individual instances may be canonical transformations of each other (and hence, in a sense identified as "the same theme"). This can take many listens in order to progressively refine, and may initially fatigue the listener such that, for the sake of their memory, they will greatly benefit from rest and recuperation.

EVA-SGA listeners, in contrast, are able to much more rapidly take in the overall structure of a piece, learning to immediately identify repetitions of passages and section and assimilate them into an overall structure that they may be able to learn to mentally track and update as the stream of sound provides more information and context. Here, the initial need for commitment of themes to long term memory is greatly lessened, and in fact there seems to be a much more substantial 'buffer', apparently in working memory, that is able to dynamically keep track of the music and how it changes as it is being listened to.

(I will not use the terms passage, voice or motif  with regard to contratonal experience as I consider them to relate to themes)


^2 Reference Hofstadter's childhood experiences with Bach.

^Harmonic: The EVA-SGN subject, though capable or percieving an ultimate chord as a resolution satisfying the tonal centers of multiple voices synchronously, will not itself simultaneously perceived as a harmony or 'harmonically unified chord'. i.e. To those lacking Super Grammar, but whom are capable of perceiving music intertonally through EVP, will be able to interpret a given chord (where appropriate) as being several distinct notes that each conclude the cadence of a separate vocal line or as being a single experience of harmony, but not both at the same time (as long as we are talking about a given set of notes that respectively both constitute the chord and serve as ultimate cadences to distinct voices in polyphony, additional supporting harmonies may naturally be added as long that they aren't interpreted as separate voices in themselves). This is effectively a claim, not that apprehension of both harmony and tonality is actually impossible, but that SGP is required in order to effectively perceive both simultaneously.

Note that when I speak of harmony, or being harmonically unified here, I mean nothing especially technical. I only mean the feelings that naturally arise on hearing a series of note together in a chord, which are generally absent when the same notes are heard bare and individually unaccompanied. I'm simply saying that these feelings will be absent if and when such a chord is experienced as polyphony in the context of an intertonal experience.

^3 Many people, in trying to understand music theory, will naturally come across the idea of tonality, yet have difficulty understanding it. In many cases, I believe that this is because they basically have no actual experience of tonality at all, even though their instructors (whether they be books or teachers) believe otherwise. On a certain level it is vaguely acknowledged by many that not everyone experiences tonality and even harmony the same way, as many cross cultural psychological experiments will attest to, but in practice many teachers assume a certain experience of harmony and tonality is possessed by the student, and that any 'deficiencies' can either be gradually 'corrected' through learning, or that otherwise the student may simply be inherently incapable of grasping the material due to how their perception is built up. This, I believe, simply doesn't capture the whole picture, as it doesn't account for the leaps of perceptual change that I and others have experienced, nor do these views account for why, if our perceptions of harmony, tonality and structure can differ, they don't seem to differ in entirely arbitrary ways (i.e. while people can learn to appreciate unusual musical forms, you can't just 'make up' arbitrary forms of music and train people to perceive your invented patterns as being being beautiful in general).

This seems to result in a conception of faux-tonality in many cases, people who are not yet capable of actually experiencing music tonally may end up mistaking their own experience of particular impressions of melodies based around a given (major or minor) scale as being what tonality properly is, without realizing that they may simply be listening to music is such a way that it is actually being experienced modally (i.e. as Ionian instead of being within a major tonality) or as dissonance^4 (where a leading tone that isn't immediately resolved may simply be felt to be unpleasant).

^4 I use dissonance in these places in a specific way. I'm not referring to harmonic dissonance, where a note that directly clashes with another is played at the same time, but to a sense of unease resulting from an unsatisfying melodic sequence. To an EVPN, all melodic sequences which might otherwise  result in developing musical tension within a tonal idiom will simply immediately be perceived as dissonant in this way.

^ambiguity It should be noted that the possibility of having ambiguous tonality (and hence 'multiple' candidate tonal centers) is different from modulations of key which can embed a given tonal structure within another (which is still 'traditionally tonal').