Hi /lit/

I've brought up what I've been working on on in some past threads (such as _) and got a fairly positive reception whenever I talked about it, with a decent number of people clearly being very interested in what I'm attempting to do and requesting to know more. So because of this, I've decided to be more open about my work and how I'm progressing. If I'm genuinely right about things and I can actually pull off everything I aim to, I should be able to provide a richer and more systematic understanding of how people perceive art differently from one another and how aesthetic sensibility can be made to arise in a given mind than anything that has so far been attempted.

You see, what I'm writing started off as a kind of chronicle of my progression from being an artistic plebeian trying to develop a deeper understanding of various art forms (including visual arts, music and poetry) to someone who would hopefully come to appreciate them more deeply over time. Only, it seems to have become something vastly more ambitious, taking the form of a catalogue of faculties/mental processes that I have reason to believe are *necessary* to enable specific kinds of aesthetic experience. My expectation initially was, essentially, that I would slowly come to understand certain things over time as I learnt more about art and got used to the conventions of various specific traditions, eventually coming to a kind of aesthetic maturity in each topic I pursued to the best of my ability. But what actually happened was far stranger. Instead of gradually making step by step progress, the bulk of what I 'learned' came in massive burst of sudden, radical and disorienting perceptual changes after months or years of making no progress at all.

And because I had actively been engaging in self observation and experimentation, I could mark out what about me seemed to have changed, specifically detailing how this affected my perception and reasoning about the underlying causes of these changes and, furthermore, what signs should indicate whether or not these things have shown up in other people. And the more I worked on this, the more I found that seemed to support what I am conjecturing, that the changes I went through seem to actually be necessary to appreciate these specific kinds of art and that the modes of perception they unlock have characteristic features that identify them.

For instance, one of the first things I discovered was that I seemed to only be able to perceive the basic structures of Art music (i.e. tonality/the desire to return to a key center, thematic transformations/development and polyphony/counterpoint) after coming to perceive such music as if it were a language (as I felt instrumental music develop oddly voice-like qualities the moment I found it was possible for me to perceive these things). And, as it turned out on investigating this, there is actually a substantial body of research showing (through fMRI, listening tests etc.) that 'musically educated' people do actually seem to actively use the language centers of their brain in listening to music, while, conversely, most laymen don't do this. So this seemingly allows me to make a fairly powerful conjecture, that the activation of the language centers for the processing of sound in general (as opposed to just natural language) is something that needs to be acquired as a prerequisite for understanding these specific structures in music. This has come to be the core pillar of my project, and I call this phenomena Encompassing Voice.

But there is so much more that I have been able to develop, including ideas that would seem to have considerably stranger consequences. As an example, I postulate that it should be possible to do things like determine aspects of literature and poetry that someone is capable of understanding from what features of music they can process, due to certain mental processes interacting in a particular way (which I go into much greater detail about on my blog). And most of what I've come up with seems to have independent support from other theorists in various forms (like the METAPHYSICS OF METAPHOR paper I mentioned in the other thread), though there seems to exist nothing else quite like the systematic examination of aesthetic development that I am attempting. Ultimately, I hope it may be possible to get to the bottom of many of the fundamental causes of difference in aesthetic ability and what can be done to address them and allow people to come to appreciate art forms that they'd otherwise be unable to.

Here are some blog entries explaining some of the more important things.

http://chromaticproduction.blogspot.com/2016/10/a-theory-of-perception.html
http://chromaticproduction.blogspot.com/2016/10/five-years-ago-unexpected-thing.html
http://chromaticproduction.blogspot.com/2017/05/variant-construction-part-1-definitions.html
http://chromaticproduction.blogspot.com/2017/08/poetic-imagination.html
http://chromaticproduction.blogspot.com/2017/09/defining-poetry-establishing-structure.html

Any questions are welcome.
