In writing my work as I have, in choosing the elements of "Phenomenology of Modal Cognition" and delineating their particulars, I have made a number of basically arbitrary choices. There are many cases where I could have chosen to define a given term differently, and, because of this difference of distinction, many of the other terms and ideas that rely on it would then have changed also - potentially causing me to divide them up differently and respect the different ways that they, as descriptors of mental phenomena, would have instead forced me to think about them and their relations, even when describing the same underlying phenomena. I could have written many such versions of this phenomenology, each with major or minor degrees of difference between them, but I happened to follow a thought process that resulted in my writing this, as the process of me progressively working out these thoughts lead to that result, as opposed to any other.

For a particular example, you have the conception of Variant Addition. Where many abstractions are overly vague descriptions of families of things that are more particular in their concrete aspects, VA is something that serves a different purpose, it is an overly concrete abstraction that takes a particular aspect of a more vague and nebulous concept (Variant Construction) and overdefines it, taking a specific part of it and making it easier to use and reason about as a kind of formal toy, which we can more easily play with to illustrate similarities between various ways our minds can come to be biased to perceive 'deeply constructed' qualities of imaginative thought and rhythmic art. The particular concrete choice of this overdefenition is somewhat arbitrary. I could have well 'cut' the choice in a number of different ways, but decided to define it such that it best illustrated the aspects of the mind I perceived, demonstrating a particular predominant structural element that both music and poetic art share in common, while also being formally simple enough for the sake of convenience without also being too 'incomplete'. I write this because I want to stress the importance of not accepting the very specific particulars of my conceptual framework in too rigid a fashion; I wish to illuminate an understanding of the mind (at the very least, my own mind), which I encourage others to approach playfully, but this is not easy to do without having set up sources of light in particular ways, however that arrangement comes about. However, this hardly means that what I describe is merely vague, unserious or without predictive power. I have taken pains to try to illuminate things as clearly as I felt able to in the way I have precisely because this is a practical necessity in order for them to be understood as meaningful theories which describe testable aspects of the world. As a result, this particular exposition has come about, as opposed to any other. I could, to better show off my intuitions, create an alternative framework for Variant Construction, covering the same subject in a different way, but I do not see that as being worth the time or effort at this point. However, having recently read Josef Stern's paper on the Metaphysics of Metaphor, I have found that he had independently come up with an alternate exposition of Vital Metaphor, which clearly describes the same phenomena as I have and even uses similar terms, but which tries to distinguish and characterise the intuition behind it via a different set of strategies. As such, it serves well as a form of alternate exposition to that particular concept, and it is valuable to see other people independently doing this.

In saying that I wish to illuminate “the mind” though, I say this in the hope that my experiences will meaningfully generalise to others in the ways I theorise they ought to. So when I speak, in the main body of this work, of how “someone with SGP” ought to be capable of thinking and perceiving in my writing, I am for the most part talking about what I have observed in my own mind, and only about other minds to the extent that people find that my descriptions and theories do apply to others, either though personal experience or though formal experimentation. In this regard, I am prepared to accept that many people may actually think completely differently from the ways I theorise thought ought to conform to, for reasons I have not anticipated, if appropriate evidence is presented. But even so, I believe that I have well founded reasons to claim that at every least, it is likely that large numbers of people will conform, in their capacity to think, imagine and perceive, to the patterns proposed by the cognitive structures I describe in this work. Regardless of this, my main task is to describe the processes and biases that have arisen within me, and secondarily to conjecture about how this may or may not generalise. So my operating assumption is that when talking about someone who possesses or lacks a given modal faculty, and what mental structures/thought patterns/biases/experiences they should posses, that their mind is either my that of own or that of someone else who is similar enough to me that my descriptions also apply to them.


I must also make note of my inclusion of what might be called footnotes. I writing many of my arguments, the text will develop a natural flow where each part is better comprehended when it promptly leads to the next then it would if all of the supporting arguments were included in the flow of that text, so such material is written down elsewhere and referenced. This is a typical justification of having footnotes, but comes with the unfortunate implication that the material in the footnotes is more minor or fundamentally less important than the main body. So instead of providing traditional footnotes, which are an arbitrary convention stemming from the limitations of printed texts, I've instead decided to provide links from parts of various text bodies to others, which can themselves further reference other bodies, including each other if necessary, whenever aspects of an argument need implicit justification that isn't provided by he main flow of their text.

The specific format of these 'linknotes' is to be decided based on publication, but on the web I have provided numbered superscripts in blue which each either link to a correspondingly numbered part of the same page, or which link to sections of other pages. In this way threads of thought can freely reference points made previously or later in the the overall work, where it may be appropriate, giving the reader the freedom to look back or skip ahead in order to explicitly collect various materials in favour of a given position within their mind.



Much of the work in this text implicitly concerns the philosophy of aesthetics. I believe that trying to understand aesthetics from a philosophical perspective, as opposed to simply experiencing various kinds of beauty and not caring about their classification, may be important for a particular reason. Namely, it allows you to understand what forms of beauty you as an individual are capable of experiencing, and how this might compare to and potentially differ from the experience of others. If someone were to say to this that they don't care in the slightest, they only want to continue to experience art as they do without bothering to acknowledge systems and schemes of classification that offer nothing of value to their actual appreciation, which may be beyond reason and classification, then I would not object in the slightest and am happy to leave them free to ignore any and all kinds of philosophy that may divide up and slot art into arbitrary holes. However, if you are to take this attitude, then I would strongly caution you against harshly judging the various 'tastes' that others may have which differ markedly from your own without first thinking about why these differences might exist and what causes may be behind this. To that end, I hope that this work is able to help people understand how the perception of beauty may differ, and show why there is in this respect so much particular similarity and difference in variation between individual people.

On top of this, I also want to make it clear what kinds of things this work is not setting out to do. Namely, I'm not trying to write a total theory of why people have different tastes and opinions of art in general. This is far outside the scope of what I specifically want to do, which is to mark out and explain particular facets of the human mind which heavily influence the capacity to (among other things) interpret works of art, hopefully demonstrate that they exist as I claim they do, at least in certain minds, and show how they may cause different individuals (or a single person at different points in their life) to perceive things in discreetly different ways.

I'm also not, at this point, attempting to create a general theory of the causes and structure behind what I call modal faculties, which would explain how and why they arise in the mind. This task is also outside the scope of this work and is likely to be an extremely difficult endeavour. The tools which would likely be needed to attempt to grapple with such as issue are not available to me, and so I defer this potential task to anyone in the future who is interested and able to try it, assuming in the meanwhile that evidence appears to support the idea that the descriptions of my own mental states and abilities provided here specifically match up to those in other human minds, and it is the case that the testable attributes I predict will be associated with these states do conform to my predictions.

I want to stress at this point that certain parts of this work hold much more weight than others. I believe that it should be possible to verify that several specific aspects of the specific mental states I describe arise together in any given person, and that any divergence from this (such as a certain aspect arising independently of others which I would otherwise predict it should mutually form a complex with) would illustrate that other minds diverge in ways which I would predict should not be possible despite me otherwise accounting for the potential for others to develop modal faculties differently from how I have. It would be very surprising to me if, for instance, it turned out there are people who are capable of hearing music as consisting of themes and thematic transformations, but who do not employ the language processing structures of the brain they possess in order to do so. This hence, is an example of something that I have anticipated in theory that existing studies seem to support, as it seems to be the case that there are generally detectable differences between those who are 'musically trained' (as defined in the relevant studies) and those who lack such training, with many of the 'untrained' demonstrating negligible use of the brain areas relating to language when listening to instrumental music in comparison (which I predict would be a demonstration of the lack of Encompassing Voice Perception in these individuals), and having a corresponding 'deficiency'* of their perception of musical structure. I do not assume that formal musical training is generally necessary for the development of Encompassing Voice Perception though, even though I do believe that the proportion of professional musicians with it is likely to be significantly higher than the general population, and that this will be in part because of the effect that their training may have had on their brains.

Others parts of the work have a higher chance of being meaningfully wrong or inaccurate, due to the difficulty of trying to describe specific structures and how they seem to diverge or appear alike. Any errors in these parts are more down to inadequacies in my knowledge and ability, as there are many people with far greater expertise in these areas that I do not have. It should be understood that my main aim in writing these sections is to describe the different kinds of perception that have arisen in my own mind as accurately as possible. That this partially results in a framework of formal description of various forms of art is somewhat of a necessary side effect of my actual goal, to illuminate the workings of my own mind and allow others to compare the workings of their own abilities of perception and imagination with mine, in order to understand how similar or different our mental states are. For instance,  I feel that my description of the tonality of Beethoven's 7th symphony (in the section building up Variant Construction) is woeful in many respects, and expect I may rightfully receive criticism for it. However, in these parts, I ask that if there are any aspects of your own intuitions that don't seem to match up with my own, to hold onto your judgement and read between the lines, to see if your basic feelings about the structures that arise in your own mind have meaningful correlation anyway.

*This is only a relative 'deficiency' in comparison to the perception of structure of those who have developed higher abilities in these areas. There is nothing 'wrong' about lacking these abilities, as the structures perceived through them are better thought of as wholesale projections of the mind rather than enhancements of existing subtleties of sound, and there is good reason to believe that they can be developed at any stage in life anyway.

---

A natural response to this whole enterprise is to be healthily sceptical of it, which I encourage. Many of my claims rest on subjective experiences that are wholly inaccessible to anyone besides myself, and so at this current point in time, where no one else seems to have been able to analyse their own phenomenological experience of the subjects discussed here in the way that I have, this gives me a privileged position from which to talk about these phenomena, which would seem especially valuable if they do apply to humanity in general. This may seem overly convenient for me, as since no one else can dispute the nature of my personal experience, the best I can do is ask others to trust me that I am reporting things as honestly as I am able to. However, while there is a certain amount of implicit trust involved, many aspects of what I discuss - if true - should be empirically verifiable in a number of ways, and as such I hope that they are able to give a certain amount of weight to the claims I make in the minds of many readers.

Some of the predictions I have made have turned out to so far be supported by existing studies. This gives me greater confidence that my own theories actually apply to others, and is part of why I believe that it will be fruitful to take their elucidation seriously. But this is still something which another person may rightly question, given that there's no reason in principal I couldn't have read those existing studies and tailored my ideas around matching up with what happened to already have evidence supporting it. As such, I am happy to be explicit about what I predict what is likely will and will not occur in future attempts to understand the human capacities for language, music and artistic experience. Certain aspects of my work should form a solid core which I expect to stay intact under scrutiny, as opposed to more peripheral elements which I add to try to clarify my experiences, but which I don't expect to offer much explicit predictive power, and may even contradict what most other people feel. This core will be explicitly stated in a later article -INSERT ARTICLE LINK/REFERENCE-.

Other aspects of this work aren't supported by scientific research, but do concur with things that have been noted by musicologists. The musician and theorist Heinrich Schenker, for instance, recognised from experience that not everyone would be able to experience the kinds of "structural hearing" he intended to illustrate in his writings. In my own writing here I attempt to partially explain such differences with reference to my own experience and how it changed at different stages of my life, in the hope that this will allow others to identify which particular structural elements they are capable of perceiving themselves. If it turns out that other people are divided in their abilities to perceive/imagine structure along similar lines, then I hope that this will add support to the reality of these ideas.

A particular example relevant to the issues discussed above is my treatment of musical elision. -INSERT DISCUSSION OF HOW I CAME TO WRITE ABOUT IT IN THE WAY I DID- Initially, in the act of writing the variant construction articles, I simply tried to report the structures that I was now able to hear using terms that I created in order to describe them. It was only afterwards, in editing what I had described in my own terms "off the cuff" that I attempted to look up existing terms that happened to coincide with the structures that I was trying to term myself. This resulted in me adding mentions of these terms to the article subsequently. But what is important here, and why I am describing the writing and editing process at all, is that I believe it is important that people reading understand that the work is largely an 'organic' attempt to describe the structures that I feel as they arose in my mind, as opposed to trying to fit my experiences into existing music theory, and that despite this, these structures naturally match up and map onto things that have been described by theorists of music anyway, which should show to a certain extent how my 'ways of hearing' specifically relate to how music (and poetry) have been approached formally. A particularly relevant example is that of musical elision. In particular, I was not aware in my initial drafting that elision was actually handled by the GTTM. Instead, I assumed that the GTTM approach to grouping structure simply didn't take such things into account, and I believed, that if my conception of groupings was a description of the same phenomena that THEY talked about, that this may well be a serious flaw of the theory, unless I was mistaken. That it turned out on reading it that the GTTM did actually give special treatment to such structures effectively confirmed to me that I was correct in my judgement. I will leave it to the reader of this work to judge the worth of this anecdote.

---

A note on the use of capitalisation in the text. In many philosophical writings in English, it is a common convention to capitalise an otherwise ordinarily common word written in lower-case in order to designate a particular sense of the word that emphasises a meaning with an implied transcendental quality, and highlight that this sense, while related to the original word or even being a subset of it, possesses some special value which deserves to be noted. This is a convention that I make use of (in the case of Ideas, aesthetic Forms, metaphysical Absolutes etc.), and which I want to note for the sake of clarity, as not all specifically capitalised words in text are necessarily implied to be transcendental. Though conversely, the leaving of something uncapitalised doesn't necessarily mean that the thing in question (or subclasses of it) necessarily lacks what may be called transcendental qualities.
