A notable aspect of what it means to be properly tonal or “in a key” is that, so far, no formal procedure by which “the key” of a given passage of music (assuming it has one) can be determined deterministically has been discovered. No one has been able to create one, by which, say, a computer might be able to 'intuit' that some music is in 'this key' and have this algorithmic 'intuition' match up with those of humans with EVP. Many notable publications exist through which we can see the implications of this; many of them involving an honest attempt to come up with a “key finding algorithm” and failing to do anything of the sort. I won't say that I'm completely sure that such a thing is necessarily impossible, but in any case I highly doubt that any thing like such a strict procedure describable in simple terms (i.e. something that can be reduced to a readily comprehensible formal definition) is capable of doing what it is specifically that humans do when they interpret a passage of music as being in a key.

What people have come up with instead though, are systems that use statistical methods in order to reason about the likelihood of a passage being in a given key. These, notably, do have real predictive power, but still don't 'discover' the tonal nature of a given piece music the way humans do, and so instead look for what might be said to be 'secondary signs' of tonality (though, in a sense, there are no 'primary signs' of tonality aside from the experience of it itself, and so everything that merely points to it, by potentially indicating it, is in that sense secondary).

So, given all this, I'm going to assume, from here on, that such a systematic key/tonality finding method is not possible. I feel there are good reasons to presume this. Aside from the above mentioned lack of existing empirical success, I believe that the intuitive (and open to introspection) process of how it is that the mind wraps itself around musical structure in order to create the sense of tonality in the first place is something that points to this being the case.* A key pointer here (both literally and metaphorically) is the freedom the actual mental process of key finding entails. In a certain sense, key finding is restricted, i.e. you cannot hear some arbitrary sequence of notes and decide, completely via your own volition, to interpret them as creating a tension leading to some simply arbitrary key. However, you do have very real negative freedom (especially as an EVASGN) to choose not to concentrate your attention to resolving the structure of the music, and, in doing do, thereby failing to interpret a specific key as something supporting the structure of the music and providing it a tonal centre. This, naturally, doesn't mean that you have 'failed' to 'properly determine' the 'actual key', as key can be ambiguous or, in numerous senses, music may be in multiple keys. People, such as EVPNs, may also by nature be incapable of perceiving an impulse to resolve to a tonal centre. So even if a piece of music can only reasonably be said to be in a single key, the specific tonal nature of the piece as it is perceived is in a sense something that arises out of restrictions on utter freedom (as opposed to being completely intrinsic). For even if a key is mentally resolved, and it is the only key that actually 'makes sense' in that context, for that key tension to exist in the first place is something that, I argue, is dependent on an apprehension of a musical structure that is being kept track of in the listener's head, without which there is no way or means of the music to 'lead anywhere' (as it can only 'go places' in tonal structure with respect to development of existing structures). Many passages could, in themselves, be taken out of their context and placed in a hypothetical new one possessing a different key (which possibly modulates temporarily to the tonality of the 'embedded passage'), thereby creating an alternate tonal centre. This implies that a freedom to parse music, such that the listener might parse something though what is in some sense the 'wrong key' for it, and then only afterwards realise that a different one is needed to properly resolve a given section, is required. That 'key' is in this sense INTRINSICALLY and ACTIVELY constituted by specific structure, even (arbitrarily?) deep ones, as opposed to something that merely 'floats' around music like a simple tag (which is closer to what EVNSGN musical experience of 'tonality' is like) is an indication of what kind of thing it is. Even (especially?) the ability to re-cognize themes and how the build up of structure depends on them is fundumental to the experience of tonality.

It is because of this, this very freedom of interpretation being intrinsic to the nature of the perception of tonality, along with its dependency on deeply composed structure and all the human creativity this allows, that any naive deterministic algorithm, or something that lacks this freedom, will in all likelihood fail to capture the nature of tonality. For anything that, when confronted with a 'Tristan and Isolde' or 'Rite of Spring' for the first time, will not ultimately  be able to creatively re-organise its capacity of interpretation in order to deal with them, not just because it was not 'pre-programmed' to, but because it is not lead by its own imagination to want to experience the music aesthetically instead of as a cacophony, will naturally differ from how it is that man is inclined to feel out music and its structure.

Artificial Inteligences may well eventually be able to do this, but only if they develop something approximating actual human intuitions. For to 'find a key' is not to discover a 'right answer' but an aesthetically meaningful one. If this involves ambiguity, as it naturally will, then any abstraction of this will avoid an understanding of the specific purpose of that ambiguity.

*Comment on the grammaticality of this sentence, how “open to introspection” seems to be needed to be preceded by an adjective+and, and yet how placing it after the subject (with “which is”) seems to create a certain cognitive burden.
