One of the factors which potentially limits the inquiry here is the nature of memory. Memory is limited and subject to flaws and things can be forgotten or falsely remembered. In recalling my own memories of music, heard before I gained a given modal faculty in order to compare that memory to what I hear afterwards, I employ long term memory in order to do so, so it stands to reason that it is a good idea to examine it in order to understand how I can make such comparisons.

One of the chief flaws of memory is the fact that memories can be overwritten, meaning that a second viewing/listen of something that differs in slight ways from the original, an attempt to explain and embellish it, or even the simple act of recalling something without additional stimulus, can alter the original memory. So given this is the case, how confident can I be that my ability recall old memories of music has not been been altered by the process of examination and comparison? The answer is, that in general, I do experience this overwriting of memory, and for each piece the initially clear memories which enable a direct comparison of feeling are gradually replaced by vaguer and more abstract ones as I continue to feel out and analyse the music. I can still get a general sense of what it is that EVP and SGP have given to me, from both the comparisons I have been able to make and the recognition of the specific feelings that underlie and signify the experience brought by each respective faculty.

However, each time I listen to a piece which I heard before the gaining of a faculty, but which I had not listened to since, I am able to compare the contrast between the memory and the experience in a very clear and vivid way, with a strong impression of the differences impacting me in the act of listening. Because of this, after gaining SGP, I deliberately choose to not listen to a number of pieces, and slowly worked my way through them over the course of a year so that I cloud feel the specific impact on structure as I worked on analysing it further.

Characteristic Features of Memory:

If someone has a characteristic experience, something occurring to them that 'registers' in their conscious experience which is entirely new to them, then the general capacity of memory seems to be capable of storing this experience, or at least a referential correspondence to it that allows its recovery, and which captures exactly what distinguishes it as a phenomena of consciousness, as opposed to any other experience. As such, it is possible for someone to experience something that they have never felt before, seemingly in kind (as in a new kind of perception), and have this experience persist in long term storage, so that whenever something else resembling it comes up, it is marked out for recall, and the person having another experience resembling it, notices this fact, possibly feeling little different than if they happened to have that same experience a short time ago. The vivid impact of something totally novel is more likely to strike the imagination and be recalled than something similar to many other past experiences. Yet at the same time it is a highly useful tool of remembrance to connect things you want to remember (which you otherwise might have not) to other things in some kind of imaginative space or order, which seems to make recall easier from otherwise 'hidden' aspects of memory. This implies something peculiar, that both highly novel, yet otherwise isolated sense experiences and ordinary, yet strongly connected to other things in a complex experiences are both aids to memory. Seemingly naturally the combination of the two, the novel event, and a strongly connected context, make the operation of memory highly reliable compare to what it would have been otherwise. And this memory capacity is one that can miraculously store seemingly anything that can be constituted within conscious experience, as a person experiences it in time – thought possibly in a form vaguer than the 'actual' experience. Though is this always really the case, isn't there so much going on that our attention is not directed to in any given space of time? Still, the memory would seem to naturally have the capacity to retain structures that are in some way identical to consciousness as experiences, which might imply a capacity that extends beyond the bounds of any particular modality, something general to conscious phenomena, though  possibly relating to the structures that allowed its generation.
