Tragedy is a word with unfortunate connotations in modern times. This is understandable, given the subject matter that it typically deals with. But as an artform, tragedy - when fully experienced - is vastly less bleak than it is popularly thought to be. I'm hardly the first person to make this point, and by now its been made in different ways by so many philosophers and critics throughout history that it may seem superfluous to try to add to all that has been said. [INSERT REFERENCES HERE]



http://classics.mit.edu/Aristotle/poetics.html

https://archive.org/stream/thebirthoftraged00nietuoft/thebirthoftraged00nietuoft_djvu.txt

http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/11/12/specials/miller-common.html



However, I have my own perspective to offer, and I feel it is worthwhile to state it in order to shed light on on my own feelings and how they compare to those of various aestheticians of the past. Naturally, the subject here is about the nature of the artform of tragedy in its many manifestations, which each share the goal of the tragic experience, and how they relate to other kinds of aesthetic experience, as opposed to the modern, common sense of the word 'tragedy' in English, of disastrously unfortunate sad events.



Now, tragedy, at its core, doesn't even need to have a plot that ultimately results in an unfortunate ending. Instead, there exist tragedies which actually end happily, and yet are still considered to be tragic, and, as I argue, for good reason. This is different from how many modern people ordinarily think of tragedy, but we'll see how such stories can actually be the same thing at heart as the more well acknowledged kinds of tragedy, one we understand what unites them. The heart of tragedy is a particular mode of feeling. The particular ways it is described by different thinkers naturally vary, but if you have experienced tragic art in this way it is likely that you can see how each description may be justified in its own terms as a perspective of the same kind of artistic event. Tragedy naturally deals with subjects involving morality, especially conflicting moralities that cross each other in their aim, and duty - which may be thought of as a way of dealing with 'fate' and the integration of human choice into the mechanical workings of the world and incorporating this into the moral sphere in a nuanced way. But ultimately, in dealing with these very general kinds of themes in the way it does, the aims of tragedy are to treat these subjects aesthetically, presenting the min such a way as to provide a unique kind of perspective on them, that is experienced as an art. And as a form of art, the focus of tragedy is to provide a subject on which the spectator can feel compassion towards, but not necessarily in the way that they might feel in real life or in the presentation of other types of drama. When this is done, the resulting plot that takes these feelings to their natural extreme or end point will frequently involve great disaster to the characters taking part in it. But this, conversely to the limited conception that many people have of it, isn't necessary. The drama may instead call for such things to happen, but not in all cases, it may just as well happen that a tragedy ends in a scene of redemption. Because ultimately tragedy isn't about sadness or making the spectator feel sadness, melancholy or regret that life isn't better. As such, genuine and ostensibly happy endings can be tragic as long as they express the fundamental drama of tragedy and allows the free exercise of compassion through this, and essentially all tragedy is ultimately joyful from the perspective of someone who fully perceives tragedy as an art.



Many aspects of tragedy as an artform stand out as notable qualities of it. The way that, despite often dealing with normally terrible subjects, it is experienced in a way that is exasperatingly pleasurable, at least in an observer who is receptive to experiencing tragedy as (arguably) intended by the writers of it, has met remarks from philosophers of art since the times of the ancient Greeks. Many explanations of how this pleasure might be possible in spite of the horror have been proposed, and I believe that this can be accounted for through personal accounts of tragic experience. I will say that my perception of tragedy matches closely with that of Frederick Nietzsch, that of...



Normally, a given person will tend to perceive the world in a particular way, from a particular kind of moral standpoint. In this mode of ethical perception, the subject will empathize heavily with people similar to themselves, and who they perceive as being 'good' people, or at least those who share a similar worldview to their own. If someone perceives someone else as having a good nature, then they will want that person to have good fortune and, especially if they know that person well, will hate the idea of any harm coming to them, which they will resent if they see anything befall them. This will trigger strong feelings of empathy towards the pain felt by another. Conversely, seeing someone who is radically different from yourself, who is possibly perceived as being unvirtuous, and further more who has committed some crime or transgressed some moral boundary that you value (or is even in the very act of doing so), will not prompt this empathetic response. Instead, we do not care what befalls this person, and will actively desire harm to come to someone we have marked as guilty and deserving of punishment. We will not feel his suffering matters, and our empathy is naturally contingent on how we have marked this person, as a sinner or as someone relatively innocent. And this is naturally subject to all kinds of human complexity. Someone who kills someone we have marked as an enemy, even if they are no worse or less virtuous then that person and would have been right to do the same themselves, will still be empathized with in the same way as an innocent as long as we are acquainted with them and they are on our side.



The tragic mode of ethical perception is different. What it does is fascinating. There is something strangely delightful about it, as it allows us to be simultaneously compassionate and sadistic towards a single agent. Essentially, instead of having the normal empathetic response which depends on your regard towards a person, resulting in you caring about their welfare in a given way, tragedy essentially short circuits and subverts this response by constructing a scenario where slotting a person into being worthy of a given kind of regard - being virtuous or innocent or guilty in a given respect - no longer makes sense. Basically the background mentality that results in your compassion being dished out differently to different people gets a fork thrown in it, letting you partially step out outside of it and perceive its contingent nature, like surveying a frozen machine - instead of operating it - and seeing how each of its mechanisms fit together and potentially lead to various outcomes. From the perspective you gain from tragic experience, you can survey part of the landscape of your own moral impulses. You can't 'see' them directly, but you do gain perspective of them, where you can feel how they interrelate and where the moral substance they rely on breaks down. It is in realizing this break down of conventional moral and causal impulses, and feeling it as something perceived intuitively, that tragedy works its magic. A tragedy, well constructed, is like a elaborate machine who's real purpose is to rip itself apart and show its innards. When you, the spectator, gain an understanding of the totality of dramatic actions and what they seem to imply about moral feeling, how we perceive intent and causality, etc. through the experience of the tragic drama, you naturally come to feel the naivety of limited, one sided views of these things. This doesn't mean that you can't say, fully agree with the actions of one character or agent and side with them over another character who opposes them - this is a freedom the tragic experience completely allows - but in doing so you, as a sensitive viewer desiring the full richness and honesty of tragedy, will acknowledge the opposing moral boundary this invariably transgresses, however you may regard it; because you wouldn't want to be ignorant of this, because as such remaining so (ignorant) would rob yourself of the pleasure of this dynamic understanding. Because it is the pleasure of seeing through naivety, of being compassionate beyond the normal limits of our moral impulses, and being about to feel delight and satisfaction in seeing actions that cause suffering to characters we admire - instead of sorrow and frustration, that fuels the drive of tragedy.



---



--NOTE: Comment on fear of tragedy - about how someone may worry about their own lack of ability to understand and feel tragedy as above, seemingly only experiencing sadness at the prospect of characters being killed off. Comment on how I also did not understand initially, until I experienced tragedy in terms of a kind of moral counterpoint, and hence experienced its 'truth' and beauty purely, without bitterness (since acknowledging their guilt instinctively puts them outside the sphere of ordinary moral affection).



Many people are intimidated by tragedy. One one hand, they may be naturally averse to downer endings out of a simple, understandable, desire to not want to walk away from something in a depressed mood, feeling bad for what transpired and regretting that things couldn't have turned out better for the characters. On the other hand, someone may understand that tragedy isn't supposed to be something that invokes these kinds of emotions, and that it aims at something 'higher' and more pleasing; and yet they may still have found that they have yet to experience this, feeling only the more depressing emotions, with anything more seemingly beyond them, implying that they lack the sensitivity to access what they ought to experience were they more sophisticated. Either way, tragedy may present itself as something for which a person may consider themselves out of their depth, and they may fear what it says about them, that they are unwilling or seemingly unable to appreciate it.



Someone may encounter ' ' of tragedy as something intimidatingly serious. They may come across, say, by happenstance, a translation of Aristotle's definition of it, as "...an imitation of an action that is serious, complete, and of a certain magnitude; in language embellished with each kind of artistic ornament, the several kinds being found in separate parts of the play; in the form of action, not of narrative; through pity and fear effecting the proper purgation [catharsis] of these emotions." and find that they not only do not understand it, as they have no experience of such a thing to compare, but that they are confronted with discussion of a kind of art that is apparently alien to them in horrific ways. The impression they might get is that 'serious' art of this kind involves going through

a borderline traumatic experience, of viscerally identifying with the characters' struggles, feeling the weight of a profound duty and being confronted with something approximating the terror of death's inevitability, and all for a purpose that seems to be merely therapeutic, of allowing the spectator to deal with such feelings better. This is approximately the impression of tragedy that is often secretly (or openly) held by those who have not authentically experienced it. Rather than knowing it to be be radiantly exhilarating, they feel it must be a kind of test of emotional strength, rather then one of insight. Hence it, arguably rightly, given this conception of this is held, holds little appeal to such people. But this ignorance can potentially be cured through explanation.



With regard to the kinds of people who are more aware of the 'proper' effect of tragedy, yet who do not seem to feel it, they may be intimidated in a second way. They will be more affected by this particular line from the Poetics:

"In the second rank comes the kind of tragedy which some place first. Like the Odyssey, it has a double thread of plot, and also an opposite catastrophe for the good and for the bad. It is accounted the best because of the weakness of the spectators; for the poet is guided in what he writes by the wishes of his audience."

Which would imply that, if they seem to not understand the tragic effect, it is a weakness of their own mind that causes this (at least according to Aristotle), which they may consider a kind of embarrassment to themselves. But again, this desire for 'happy' plots is natural, given that someone is unable to genuinely comprehend tragedy, and most of this 'weakness' can be overcome if the spectator can learn to regard tragedy with the appropriate mindset, or in the case of tragedy with poetic content that relies on specific modal faculties, develop these faculties. It should be kept in mind though that this only matters for 'actual' tragedies, which are different from stories which are deliberately constructed to end sadly, but which do not provide the dramatic conflict and emotions of true tragedy. Most sad stories as such are simply not tragedies, and it should be understood that even someone who has experienced the art of tragedy properly will still regard these plots as being miserable.



Regardless of the case, there should be no reason for an individual to shame themselves over feeling inadequate as a spectator in the face of tragedy. After all, I did not initially understand this at first, until I experienced it, as Nietszche explains:



"Let the attentive friend picture to himself purely and simply, according to his experiences, the effect of a true musical tragedy. I think I have so portrayed the phenomenon of this effect in both its phases that he will now be able to interpret his own experiences. For he will recollect that with regard to the myth which passed before him he felt himself exalted to a kind of omniscience, as if his visual faculty were no longer merely a surface faculty, but capable of penetrating into the interior, and as if he now saw before him, with the aid of music, the ebullitions of the will, the conflict of motives, and the swelling stream of the passions, almost sensibly visible, like a plenitude of actively moving lines and figures, and could thereby dip into the most tender secrets of unconscious emotions." - Birth of Tragedy - 22




---



--Comment on the tragic, objective, compassionate nature of counterpoint and its similarity to tragic dialog.



I believe that tragedy has much in common with the art of counterpoint. In each case, expressions of Awareness play off each other. This similarity will be seen most aptly when the very dialog of the tragedy takes upon certain musical aspects of form. Sometimes, the dialog will be in verse, and so the dialog of multiple speakers will continue their patterns of syllabic beats independent of the particular speaker, hence the contrasting dialogues will be felt to fold into each other. Sometimes, speakers may speak over each other, letting speech overlap directly in time so that each character airs their viewpoints to the other and simultaneously listens to the others, while the audience receives both. Other times, neither such poetic display occurs, the drama instead occurs in plain speech - and yet it may still contain a certain amount of this naturally musical quality to it, not directly though actual rhythm or counterpoint, but through the feeling of the drama itself, as I will explain.



In much the same way I have generalized the sentence and the musical theme into the canonical sequence, I will generalize the individual vocal line in counterpoint in music and the individual speaking character's lines in a drama into a common abstraction called an Awareness. Each Awareness is both an object of (both the spectators and other Awarenesses') compassion in itself, and at the same time perceived as being capable of feeling sympathy for the other aspects of awareness it may be put into (generalized) counterpoint with, along with disagreement and other things contingent in part on their separateness. People naturally feel for characters. And in music, vocal lines in counterpoint seem to serve a similar role, they will appear -to someone with EVP - as emotional objects, deserving of sympathy, interacting, responding to each other as the music plays out. They are not necessarily experienced as coherent individuals (though lacking SGP will force the listener to feel them with a certain degree of individualization), but there is still a sense of expressive character to them, an aliveness that I express here through the term Awareness.



The Awareness creates a dialectic in unison. Each part of the drama, the actor rhapsodizing, the instrument phrasing itself, seems (to the audience, and to the performers "acting in character") to be to some arbitrary degree aware of the nature of what it is counterpoised against, being intimately connected with and wanting to understand it to some particular degree. Yet at the same time it is still opposed to the counterpart Awareness, each mutually reflecting on each other in their opposition to each other (though in musical counterpoint there may be three or four instances at once in the case of a fugue). The characters in a tragic drama will naturally want to understand each other through dialog and conversation, and at the same time multiple instruments and singers playing together will also perceived to have this quality of (at least attempted) mutual understanding, though the subject of music here is abstract emotional content and the themes that allow it to be conveyed. Awarenesses naturally express themselves though canonical sequences and variant sequences, sentences and verse in the case of tragic drama, and themes and variant structures derived from them in the case of (Classical style) music.



--NOTE: Comment on emotional objectification in comparison to direct emotion.



So, similar to how I say there is an 'ordinary' mode of empathy in contrast to tragic compassion, likewise with music there is the 'ordinary' experience of direct emotional engagement with music, which contrasts with that of empathetic objectification of musical Awarenesses. [] In ordinary engagement with music, the experience is of direct affect, whatever is happening right now in the music will directly influence your mood and feelings. This effect will not always be instant, as previously experienced sound will affect how you are affected by sound shortly after; in this way beats and melodies are meaningful, the general mood the music establishes can set a base of feeling that can be felt in contrast with other moods if the music progresses though things like changes in tempo or mode. Patterns of verse can set up expectations of leading to a chorus or bridge, and yet various musical events can happen basically arbitrarily without necessarily grossly violating any feelings of natural inevitability. The music can come to a halt or it may fade out into the background. And ultimately, each melody and sonic effect will be felt in a direct fashion, as opposed to being abstracted into an emotional object.



It's this abstraction and objectification, into counterpoised Awarenesses, vocal lines containing instances of themes responding to each other, that constitutes empathetic objectification, which contrasts with the ordinary mode. That this is distinguished from ordinary direct engagement with the emotional content of music is important. It is because only people who have access to EVP - or a mode of engagement with equivalent power, letting them perceive musical lines as voices - can perceive music as conversing Awarenesses, that they are able to apprehend music in this objectified way. This objectification, distance or - possibly, if it is part of the same phenomena - Kantian disinterest, doesn't imply non engagement or emotional apathy. Rather, it involves engagement on a different level, one that perceives contrasts between elements, as opposed to primarily identifying with or inordinately sympathizing with one part. This level of engagement is full of sympathy and passion, but these are mediated by one's understanding instead of being caused by direct affect. Effectively, engaging in music in this way potentially shields you from this visceral affect, which can be good and bad, depending on the nature of the music. Most 'Art music' will be experienced in a more objectified way, with this being particularly true of Classical era music, which strongly emphasizes instruments being heard and interpreted clearly in a very voice like way. Romantic era music, in contrast, more often incorporates direct emotion, but it would be a mistake to characterize this as mostly being true of it, as it still heavily involves objectification. A good contrast can be made here between some of Beethoven's symphonies and his piano sonatas, with the former (and this is especially true of the 3rd and 6th) being generally more objectified and the latter (especially the 'Pathetique') being considerably more direct.



But those lacking EVP will not be able to perceive this objectrification. Hence, people who lack this capability will naturally perceive all music in the ordinary, directly emotional way, and will not be able to objectify these emotions, even if the music was written to be experienced in this objectified fashion. As such, when hearing such music, they will be be directly confronted with emotional content that was not meant to be experienced in such a direct fashion, and this will often not be pretty. Or rather, it may actually be felt to be 'pretty' but only in a mostly obnoxious, sickly sweat, kitschy, shallow form (which will be especially true of much music of the Classical period written in a major key). Since the music can say nothing to them this is all they will get from it. Minor key adagios will be felt to be full of all kinds of lethargic and depressing dissonance, if they do not simply come of as being incredibly boring and pompous expressions of unease. A symphony like Beethoven's 3rd will sound unrelentingly boisterous. But when objectification is an active mode of perception, it will be possible to apprehend the 'heroic flavor' of the symphony as a kind of story unfolding in time, dramatically told by the instruments, instead of trumpets blaring a caricature of this heroism,

with the seemingly corny implication that it is you, or in general an arbitrary someone, who should be feeling heroic, and for no good reason.



-Objectification, distance (or, possibly, if it is part of the same phenomena, Kantian disinterest) doesn't imply non engagement or emotional apathy. Rather, it involves engagement on a different level, one that perceives contrasts between elements, as opposed to primarily identifying or inordinately sympathizing with one part. This level of engagement is full of sympathy and passion, but these are mediated by one's understanding.



-Even in the ancient world, tragedies with more heavily didactic moral viewpoints, such as many of Euripides, were considered inferior to those which might have what might be said to have freer approaches to morality.



-In the sense in which I use the term tragedy here, the sadder someone feels about a presentation of events, the less tragic they are.



- Mention my personal preemption of Kierkegaard's actual argument despite it being inadequately presented by another.





[INSERT] http://www.nytimes.com/books/00/11/12/specials/miller-common.html



[] An important distinction between the tragic mode and that of musical objectification that I must continue to stress is that, while musical objectification requires EVP, tragedy in general doesn't demand any particular modal faculty that I am aware of. A given tragedy, like a Shakespeare play, may specifically demand one (SGP in this case), but other tragedies may not, and yet can still be experienced as tragedy, as opposed to the experience of musical themes in counterpoint as Awarenesses, which necessitate EVP. So while I have stressed the importance of specific modal faculties, like EVP and SGP, with respect to the ability to perceive the value in specific forms of art, tragedy is not in general dependent on any I have identified. That is to say, while certain specific tragic works may rely on highly poetic language or music that may require one modal faculty or another, it is still possible to create tragedy that is not dependent on either, as I was able to understand and experience the nature of tragic art prior to gaining either faculty. The plays of Henrik Ibsen are examples of such works that seemingly do not demand these faculties of perception. However, it may be said that the perception of tragedy depends on the ability to view morality and moral dilemmas in a specific way, so it may well be the case that certain people, such as sociopaths, may not be capable of this (though I will distinctly not rule out this possibility, it may be the case that the moral perspective that tragedy offers is very much accessible to the sociopath, as sociopath is a perspective that may allow one to abstract from direct concern towards an individual).