

I want to distinguish betwen two kinds of structural apprehension, the overt and the covert.

The overt kind is what we might say we can feel intuitivly, in that it 'stands out' as it is experienced. It may have a characteristic 'feel' that distinguishes it as the structure it builds up is being presented to the mind as it is derived from what is presented through the senses, and as such has the capacity to draw the attention of consciousness to it in particular when a consciousness is aware of its characteristic feeling and cognizes it.

The covert kind is experienced implicitly, as a consequence of a structure being built up in a particular way, due to particular biases, and lacks any charactristic feeling that would allow one in principal to immediately determine that a particular kind of structure is being formed, and so it is generally only on reflection and analysis that such structure becomes apparent, as the processes causing its formation are both automatic and unconsious (in that they lack a signature feel inside of one's awareness and the mechanisms producing the structure are not directly privy to consiousness or directly controlable by it except by altering how the content producing the structure is present in the mind).

An example of overt apprehension is that of a person aware *that* they are cognising a musical theme. As I have explained elsewhere, this has certain characteristic qualities, which are directly apprehensible by a consciousness experiencing it, such as the feeling of tension and the expectation of resolution. Likewise, the sense that arises when a Japanese speaker encounters an adverb at the begninning of a sentenct and implicitly recognises that its concrete sense will be determined when an appropriate verb appears. In my personal experience, this characteristic feeling manifests similarly to the tension of a musical theme, where a specific sound feels like it needs to be resolved through a structural event, rather than a specific awareness of the meaning of the adverb (i.e. I don't feel consciously that a word like 'motto' means anything to my conscious awareness until a relevant verb is encountered, even though reflecting on it would bring to mind the awarenss that the word is likely speaking of an increase in greatness of some action) and has the same characteristic feeling of tension associated with it. With overt apprehension, it can be immediately clear to the subject that their mind is doing something specific, and that this tends to result in characteristic kinds of structure naturally arising along with the feeling, such as musical themes arising in mental cohabitation with the feeling of desire to (eventually) rest on a tonic.

Covert structural apprehension is naturally more difficult to make explicit, but I want to bring is up in contrast to overt sturctural experience to make it clear that a difference exists and that both forms of apprhension are important to note. Noting such distinctions ought to be helpful in many ways. For instance, someone trying to learn music theory, but who lacks Encompassing Voice, may assume that many of the ideas the ideas being discussed are largely covert, and hence difficult to understand becuase understanding requires concious reflection and thought for them to be apparent. Making this conjecture, they may rely on the assumption that they are strugling because they are not noticing subtlties of structure that ought to be apparant if only they were to concentrate harder and study more, but that otherwise they ought to have some vague understanding of the subject matter. However, I beleive that this would be mistaken, as my experience is that certian structure simply arises naturally and intuitivly when EVP is gained, and that such structural aspects of music, such as the feeling of the tonic, are immediately apparent when they are experienced, and aren't things that it makes sense to derive from heavily analytical concentration. As soon as I developed EVP, an intuition of the existance of a tonic, and that certain sequences of notes leading to it constitute a resolution, while others would not, became apparant, and it was simply a matter of hearing or imagining a passage of music playing out in a certain way and judging how it felt that I could evaluate the 'sense' of a musical structure being tonal by its characteristic feeling of leading to resolution. It was clear to me, having that experience, that much of the content of music theory books actually involved descriptions of structures that are simply directly experienced and stand out as specific things that are clearly apparant to the listener. Hence, having experienced that, I know that the basic experience of tonal structure is overt, and that anyone who finds the ideas behind tonality to be confusing or unintuitive likely simply hasn't experienced it for themselves. The theory then largly consists of descriptions of structures that, to the writer/listener are simply and obviously 'there', only described in technical terms in order to make the physical/musical occurances that have specific aspects in common that trigger these experiences more apparant, i.e. there is clearly 'some note' that appear penultimately before the tonic, but it isn't necessarily obvious that, for what is described as a full cadence, this is what is called the dominant, and that has a fixed harmonic relation to the tonic of seven semitones.

Conversely, the possibility of covert sutructure is important to keep in mind when considering the variety of possible complexities in a given grammar. Certain structures may arise automatically, not signalling themseves with charactersitic feeling beyond that of the structure taking a specific form.

Some structural apparitions may me more or less overt or covert, as opposed to the categories having distinct and well defined bounderies. What matters is not to make a strict classification, but that the issue is brought to mind in order to avoid people mistaking some phenomena for something it might not be.