Super Linguistic Perception FAQ

Q: Why Super Linguistic Perception?

A: The idea is that there is a connection between many abilities that were previously thought seperate or not aknowledged at all. Essentially, like UVP, SPG is a mode of cognition that can be dormant in people and must be unlocked in order to become active. It enables the following:

- The ability to intuitively understand blank verse and other advanced forms of poetry, by providing the sense of structure produced by metre, alliteration and other techniques that otherwise will have no sense of purpose.
- The ability to comprehend such poetry aesthetically through an abstract, conceptual/metaphorical imagination that combines the components of the poem into a 'total image' that isn't necessarily visual.
- The ability to percieve musical themes (as provided by UVP) responding to parts/subsections of each other instead of the theme needing to be completed in each instance while responding to each other in whole (examples of this in LATER ARTICLE).
- The ability to have this thematic weight carry over sudden and abrupt changes in time signature (as in The Rite of Spring).

Q: What is SLP?

A: Super Linguistic Perception is the mental mode of operation that enables the perception of "hierarchially composed" forms. It means that things like the emotional intentions of Shapespeare's metred verse (or, for that matter, any poetry that heavily relies on metre for its structure over rhyme) and the high level structure of a composition like Beethoven's 'Eroica' symthony are impossible to apprehend for a person in which SLP is not active. SLP seems to enable a number of things, and in partcular, it provides, to any individual who possesses it, the ability to imagine things in a particular kind of abstract way which is not otherwise possible. This is not to say that people without SLP are incapable of abstract or metaphorical kinds of thinking, but with SLP there becomes possible a particular kind of thought, one that involves the mixing of different conceptual categories into abstract ideas that are still directly imaginable, which as far as I cannot tell cannot occur without SLP.

SLP involves a fairly abstract set of mental possibilities, and it really is best is this case to demonstrate with examples what it means and why I hold it to have such significance.

To make it clearer what this entails, I will quote the opening of Hamlet:


In a Station of the Metro -

The apparition of these faces in the crowd;
Petals on a wet, black bough.

	- Ezra Pound

In reading this poem, there are a number of thing you may feel in apprehending it. Maybe you will feel a certian effect, a sudden sense of a small, thrilling delight as your minds wraps around the poem and feels the contrast of imagery. Or maybe you do not. Maybe instead. I chose this examle not because it would be the clearest demonstration of what SLP is, but because it is one of the shortest examples that might show a person that they do have Super Linguistic Perception (and one of the first things I encountered that hinted at its broad nature). Simply put, if you do not have SLP, then you will not be able to appreciate the poem. It may instead strike you as merely a cynical and dreary comparison between the blackness of a tree branch and the nameless suited people one might encounter when getting off a train. But with SLP? Well, maybe you will naturally catch more richness in this abstract contrast.

So to continue on with this line of inquiry, I will show you what else cannot be done without SLP and why this is so. If you follow me, and believe what I am saying, then maybe you will see how far reaching the implicatiosn of this could be.