High school students dread discussions of symbolism. This is perfectly natural of course, as they for the most part have every reason to consider the topic abhorrent. Why have things turned out like this? That's something I want to explore.

Now the typical 'literature class view' of symbolism tends to go like this: An author has written a novel. This novel, in particular ways, contains 'symbols', which are things or attributes of things within the context of the novel which potentially 'stand for' other things. The purpose of these symbols is to communicate something, some message of other that the reader is supposed to pick up, that they stand for. However, there's also a catch, this 'meaning', in most cases, is going to be unclear and possibly ambiguous, so its up to you, the reader, to do some legwork. The reader must puzzle out 'what the author really intended', in the hope of uncovering the messages, only that isn't quite true either, it may be possible to interpret many conflicting messages within the author's work, and maybe the original intention shouldn't matter, maybe the work itself should be scoured alone, and as long as you can support your interpretation, it can be considered a valid meaning. So we have something that apparently was written with the intent to communicate something, and which is valuable because of this. Yet the thing that it's supposedly communicating is ambiguous, possibly to the point of being so that the opposite of a given meaning could also be interpreted as being valid, as long as you can give your teacher a convincing argument for this. Yet this too is supposedly a virtue of the work, that it supports multiple such interpretations, and this is seemingly a signification of its richness. Of course it's also a bonus if these interpretations happen to coincide with the political views the teacher happens to hold.


There is also an analogue here with many other art forms and how they are frequently treated in acedemia. You may hear many students and professors talking about critical theory or the importnace of the social responsability of the artist, in what ever particular sense they might mean at the time. Imagine to the contrary that this *didn't* happen, and that instead, the same topics cropped up, dealing with the same broad social phenomena, only they focused on kitchen utencils and appliences and their relation to society, justice and morality. This, in principal, should hardly be outside the realm of a decently active imagination. After all, the articles used to perform household chores have an enormous effect on the actual spaces and roles traditionaly assigned to particular genders and classes and enormously how they exist in society and the quality of life that is hence available to such people. Surly then it would not be unjustified to, instead of subjects relating such social issues to the Arts, have equally large ammounts of time, research, scholorship and money dedicated to acedemic subjects focusing on domestic utilities and their relations to the same things? But given this isn't the case, surly it could be argued that focusing on the relation of Art, of all things, to society is unjustly elitist? That is, unless there is specific reason to beleive that dedicating disproportional amounts of time to this study is naturaly expected to have a greater impact or otherwise be of more substantial importance, that the only reason this particular relation between two issues (that of Art and its social impact) is so inordinately pronounced is due to a combination of fashion, student interest and prestige.

