To: komponisto

Subject: Music Cognition

I'm writing this message to you because I feel that, because of what I've seen of your writing, you're the person here who I would most benefit from presenting my ideas and experiences to. I've been working on a framework, a decent portion of which involves music theory, which would have meaningful implications if it turns out it its core concepts are correct and that it does actually apply to people in the ways I predict it does.

My biggest problem so far is that when I present it to people it tends to garner one of two responses: firstly, for them to dismiss the ideas on principal without bothering to look at them because of their scepticism and preconceptions (which I don't entirely blame them for), or secondly, to accept them largely without question and become another follower who is interested in what I'm trying to do but is incapable of offering substantial criticism. Clearly, though the second is more desirable to me than the former, it would be more fruitful if someone who is capable of engaging with it more substantially was able to criticise it.

So here is the main blog where I explore my experiences and ideas (intended to be read chronologically):

https://chromaticproduction.blogspot.com.au/

Essentially, my thrust is this: I have had specific experiences which caused my comprehension of musical structure to undergo “quantum leaps” and I want to discuss the possible consequences of this. I do not believe what happened in each case to be at all arbitrary, for reasons I explain in detail in the blog, and as such I believe that it may be the case that most other humans are at one of the discreet stages of comprehension that I outline, as opposed to it being the case that we vaguely 'pick up' the conventions of musical structure simply through cultural osmosis (making them seemingly arbitrary), or alternatively that everyone is born with it all innately *there* and simply has to notice it and get used to it.

So because  I have gone through these experiences and are in a position to analyse them, I've found that I've been able to independently work out certain music theoretical ideas that seem to meaningfully to match up with aspects of existing theories. However, and this is the crucial part, I believe my ability to understand and think about these aspects was possible only after activating certain mental powers, which I have termed *modal faculties* and which are what I propose caused the quantum leaps, as prior to doing this certain things simply weren't perceived as meaningful structures at all even if I tried to do so. My work concerns the possible implications of the two faculties that I have identified:

- Encompassing Voice: This is the ability to perceive musical tones in general as having voice like qualities. This is what allowed me to perceive music as being “in a key” for the first time, as this possibility seems to arise only when people come to perceive instrumental music in the same way they perceive sentences (and I believe there are also studies showing this to be the case). The implication of this is that there exist a great many people who cannot and do not perceive pieces of music as having the quality of being “in a tension that feels it needs to be resolved by progression through a sequence of notes towards a particular key”, as I can assure you from experience that this never occurred in the twenty odd years of my life before I acquired this ability, even when I specifically attempted to actively listen to western art music. What instead took place is something I want to explore, as music doesn't at all lack 'relative' qualities in this state, but there is at least no large scale tension that would ultimately lead to the possibility of thematic development, which is what is specifically lacking without this ability. Hence, there is a sense in which I claim that the way I heard music prior to this was meaningfully “not tonal” (though this this doesn’t imply that how, say, a scale is used in a given context won't matter, simply that all that would imply tonal 'tension' is perceived as essentially 'flat' dissonance without structure).

- Super Grammar: This is what I have called the additional faculty that allows one to 'bend and fold' thematic structures over themselves and interpret this as a meaningful extension of their structure. What is really fascinating about this is that it seems to apply to poetry as well, meaning that the fruits of musical training will necessarily transfer and impact one's apprehension of literature in very specific ways, and that lacking this implies the non-comprehension of multiple forms of art. I believe that Leonard Bernstein was able to partially identify this structural aspect in his “The Unanswered Question” lectures, and that he was correct to consider this aspect of music to be specifically poetic. This also seems to be tied to an aspect of the imagination that I have termed “Vitalistic Imagination”, which allows one to perceive “vital metaphors” in an active way. Again, this is a phenomena that seems to have been independently identified by another (to the extent he even came up with similar terminology), namely Josef Stern in this paper:
http://philosophy.uchicago.edu/faculty/files/stern/life_death_met.pdf

I believe that the connections between all of these phenomena as I have observed them arising in my mind may be able to shed some light on how it is that the ability to perceive certain kinds of patterns as being meaningful comes to be. I would be happy if you were willing to look over what I have produced so far. However, if you are reading this and think its all a bit much, I don't blame you. These ideas should appear striking and I hope that you evaluate them with a critical eye if you wish to do so. For if I have discovered what I think I have then this may allow a significant advance in the understanding of why it is that people perceive music, and other art forms, so differently, yet without forcing people to throw up their hands and say that it is all just culturally relative.
