There is one more aspect of the mind which arose with and is intimately connected with SGP, and which deserves special treatment given how significant it is, which I have decided to call Vital Imagination (VI). The key thing to understand is that it is a whole, unique kind of imaginative faculty and form of perception* that, from my experience, not everyone will possess (as it is tied to SGP and as far as I can tell won't exist in those without it), distinct from the imaginative abilities involving the 'typical' Aristotelian sense modalities. It allows anyone possessing it to literally experience entirely different kinds of thoughts that otherwise are not possible without is, so I want to make it clear exactly how important this is. Where normally, various kinds of thought involving both concrete imaginations (i.e. the ability to imagine an image or scene in your head or hear a tune playing in your mind) and abstract imaginations (i.e. mathematical structures and symbolic relations that are semi-independent of specific modality) are possible, Vital Imagination adds additional possibilities, whole new categories of thought synthesis, over what is imaginable without it.

-Note how aesthetic theory can describe 'taste' as an internal sense. Propose the thesis that in these terms 'taste' with regard to poetry is equivalent to Vial Imagination (in its natural complex with SGP).

At the core of Vital Imagination is a particular kind of understanding that is achieved through metaphor. I want to make it clear that, even without SGP (and hence VI, which is directly tied to it) a certain, more limited, kind of metaphorical understanding is still possible, which I will term conceptual metaphor. I want to make this point early because I really need to make sure that people aren't confused but what I'm going to say, which is that certain kinds of metaphor, vital metaphors, can only be properly experienced or understood by a person with VI. This is important, because otherwise people may think that because they do have the capacity to understand metaphorical ideas, as most people likely can (even if they do so only conceptually), that they actually have Vital Imagination. But it was not until I gained SGP and VI that I experienced vital metaphors in full (meaning including both the vital and conceptual aspects). Prior to that point there were certain kinds of experiences that I had not developed the capacity for, and certain aspects of language were hence comparatively lacking in significance.

-Introduce vital imagination with 'slack' as the metaphorical example. Contrast vital metaphor with visceral and conceptual (analytic) metaphor. Use "pick up the slack", "slacker", "slack off", "Compass/Encompass", "Bottom of the barrel", "out of left field", "on the tip of my tongue", "teetering over the edge"; "en-joy"; "Gross", "Grocer". Contrast with Owen Barfield's "no stone left unturned" and "walked out of life".

To begin with an initial example, take the word 'slacker'. Hearing the word in a modern context, it's generally immediately obvious what it means and its association with laziness should be readily apparent. Likewise, we can hear similarly derived phrases like "slack off" and understand what they mean. However the word 'slack' itself has another, quite different meaning, referring to the lack of tightness of a rope. Think about it a bit and you can understand how the former meaning might have come from the latter. You might imagine a sailor being berated for not pulling his line fast or hard enough, and hence such lack of grit becoming known as 'slackness' in a natural way. I want to now take the opportunity to bring up some of Owen Barfield's writing here, in which he speaks of having similar experience in his own development of metaphoric understanding, and makes a similar point about how metaphorical thinking may relate to the meaning of phrases as they are handed down through the generations (a thing which, as he himself points out, many people prior to him have also noted), in order to better establish my own ideas. In his article The Origin of Language, Barfield makes this point, that many phrases have deadened or dried out metaphorical meanings which were likely what begat their origin and what the original coiners of those phrases intended the hearer to imagine.

Now, the key thing is, anyone who is capable of understanding metaphor conceptually will still be able to grasp the meanings of many these metaphoric aspects of language, especially if this is first pointed out to them. They will intelligibly be able to comprehend that a word might have had a given origin, and that in using it they're using something that happened to be a metaphor that came from a source that's typically distant from whatever context they are actually using it in now. But they generally won't feel the full force and effect of the metaphorical origination, nor will they be fully aware of this at the same time as they use it in their new context; that won't come naturally at all, nor do I believe it is really possible. So both the unprompted, subconscious 'picking out' of original metaphorical feelings from existing language in the act of use and the simultaneous realization of the vital feeling that this knowledge imparts in the act of using it are things that those lacking VI are locked out of in general, even if they can otherwise be made aware of these etymological aspects of language.

I naturally understand why someone might be critical of this idea, given that in many ways it seems to be unnecessary. Why claim that the experience of metaphor is delineated into distinct types like this? The core reason, is that along with the ability to understand poetic metaphor in the context of high poetry due to the fact that SGP allowed me to understand the structure of  such verse, I also found myself experiencing feelings similar in kind outside of language that had any discernible poetic form where I didn't before. 'Stock phrases' became vividly alive within my imagination when I heard or used them, in contrast to before where I had always accepted. Along with this, I experienced literature in general in new ways. Since even prose without the 'proper' structure of poetry can make use of the vital imagination, it should hardly be surprising that literary works frequently make meaningful use of it (the further significance of I will get into later).

One of the greatest aspects of gaining VI, with regards to the experience of art, is that it not only makes certain aspects of language pleasurable where they weren't before, but it also makes certain other aspects, which can otherwise be actively disturbing, disgusting and simply unpleasant in general, loose these qualities. It's not quite like these aspects disappear outright, but rather, the vitality of meaning that arises acts like a bright light and outshines the negativity of experience that might otherwise occur, turning art that would be experienced as something depressing and horrid into a thing of beauty. The effective experience of language, metaphor and meaning becomes vivid in a way it was not before. Experiencing the vital is comparable to having a light shone onto language that at last reveals its full pallet of colors and how they can mix together to form now ones dynamically.

The vital is an abstract building up of meaning that is experienced vividly and with strong, positive emotion despite begin abstract in nature. It is not experienced directly as sight, or sound, or touch or as any kind of related sense or how each of the senses are felt when they directly affect a person, despite being able to metaphorically 'borrow' other feelings that might relate to phenomena experienced by the senses through. In contrast, the negative feelings that can otherwise stem from experiencing certain passages and the concrete things they portray in the absence of this vitality are experienced viscerally.

...

So, you might be thinking, if many of these decayed metaphorical aspects of words are in some sense ordinary (visceral or simply otherwise non-vital) metaphors, ones that - in contrast to largely poetic metaphor that is essentially dependent on vital imagination - can be imagined concretely if your mind is put to it, then why would the perception and appreciation of them be dependent on this vital imagination? I can't say completely, but when a person without vital imagination encounters a dried metaphor in the form of a stock phrase, they typically have no impulse in them that would make them consider the meaning behind the phrase, no unconscious mental process that inadvertently searches through alternate meanings while they recall the phrase. Whereas, when someone has developed vital imagination, the mental processes this introduces will create such impulses where they weren't there before. We can look back at the Barfield essay and see that in considering the "excessit e vita"/"walked out of life" example, the author/subject recognizes this mental development occurring at some point during his teenage years, noting that he he went from having little reason to care about such metaphorical aspects of language, to considering them, as they are used in poetic language, the greatest form of art by the time he was 20. That Barfield recognizes that this particular metaphoric aspect of ordinary language, which he did not appreciate as a younger boy, was the same in kind as the metaphoric aspect that he came to appreciate in poetry as an adult, is crucial evidence that the phenomena he experienced is the same as what I am calling Vital Imagination. My justification for this claim rests on the experience that while I could certainly understand metaphorical ideas in certain respects, there were particular aspects of metaphor that I simply did not experience until awakening SGP and vital imagination together. I will assume that the same was the case for the young Barfield, that he was very much aware that "excessit e vita" was in fact a metaphor for death, even one that other people might consider beautiful, and why this would make sense conceptually. Yet despite this, he would not yet be capable of experiencing or appreciating it as a vital metaphor until years later, when he specifically notes the new sense of beauty he feels for it.

In respect of this particular kind of thought experience, the actual history of a given phrase is largely incidental. It doesn't matter strictly what the etymology of a word actually is or how it might have arisen as a metaphor as such (though this is often relevant in practice), what matters is this this sense is communicable in some way through a language/culture such that it engages a given person's vital imagination and allows them to feel this particular multiplicity of meaning. It is this natural sense of multiplicity of meaning, which is felt to be alive in some way, as opposed to the use of a stock phrase without consciousness of any reason as to why people might have come to phrase things like that, that is the essence of the vital metaphor. And triggering new, original forms and deliberately elaborate metaphoric constructions that make use of this faculty of vital imagination is the main task of the poet who aims to write high poetry.

...

Now I feel the need to need to explain certain issue. Why, not simply call VI "Poetic Imagination", given that it relates directly to understanding things is a particularly poetic way? Firstly, not all poetry actually uses it. There are even lines of Shakespere that, from my memory of when I lacked this faculty, I was completely able to comprehend and of which my impressions have not changed since.

But look, the morn, in russet mantle clad,
Walks o'er the dew of yon high eastward hill.

These lines of Hamlet, to my mind, contain no vital aspect of any significance. The enjoyment of them is not diminished by lacking VI, nor is it enhanced by possessing it. This is in stark contrast to the dialog of the rest of the play.

...

There are certain aspects of Zen philosophy that, as far as I have experienced, are impossible to comprehend without Vital Imagination. To begin to properly apprehend koans and the essential effect they should have on your mind, this imaginative faculty seems to be needed. When I read through a koan now, a common experience that is similar in kind between each of the koans that affect me occurs. It is similar in a way to the reading of a poem, but instead of building up a vital, conceptual object through this faculty, instead the vital imagination is arrested, a scenario is presented that seems to clear and dismiss the metaphorical imagination once it is properly realized. You feel as if you have encountered something that triggers an impulse towards the vitally imaginative process, yet is beyond it and cannot be grasped directly by it. In a person with only 'ordinary' imagination, my experience is that this effect will not occur, there will only instead be the feeling that you are reading something that seems strange and yet has no clear purpose, the effect that koans seems to have in common will not become apparent until the vital imagination is activated and is there so that it can be felt to be cleared of  'concrete' content.

*The specific delineation between an 'imaginative' faculty and a 'perceptual' faculty is not something that seems to have a hard answer. So I want us look at it like this. Certain specific modalities, like sight, can be activated by external perception caused by signals from the eye, which will cause a vivid impression of color forms. Conversely, for people without visual aphantasia at least, it is also possible for the human mind to create an internal impression of color and form that is similar in quality (to that received through the corresponding sense) but which is felt to be less real. So here, we have a sensory faculty and a corresponding imaginative faculty. I will take this to be the model of a 'typical' Aristotelian sense and the associated modality it takes part in. In contrast, there also exist one-sided, internal modalities that seemingly don't have a directly corresponding sense organ, instead they only have the single faculty. We can use the spatial feeling to illustrate this. In seeing, hearing or touching objects, we might build up a sense of space, space within which we may move around and which may also contain obstacles, walls and other things that take up space. We don't always feel this arising directly form another sense, the knowledge that a wall is on a certain place relative to another can persist within this imaginative faculty of space, even if we can't directly see it. Solids, as far as we have reason to believe they do through our experience, posses volume** and we will feel that, even if we only see an object's surface, that this volume persists. So, in the case of this particular modality, can we really say that there are two aspects of it, both a vividly experienced perception and an imagination, or is there not much of a distinction at all? I will call such a one sided modality a pseudo-modality. In this way you could argue that vital imagination could be considered its own pseudo-modality - depending on what you are willing to call a modality - though one that more strongly relates to other modalities and the synthesis of many of their aspects, as opposed to being a 'ground' of uniquely and highly distinct feeling qualia (as the spatial pseudo-modality seems to resemble more). But if you were to do so, you might have to admit that other things that are traditionally not labeled modalities, things like tension and anticipation, might gain the status of a pseudo-modality due to them being essentially 'hallucinated' in association with events received through other modalities. At the very least I will continue to call Vital Imagination an imaginative faculty, in accordance with other philosophical conceptions of imagination (like those of Kant and Wittgenstein).

**We could very well imagine objects to be mere shells consisting of their currently visible and tangible surfaces, as if we existed within a video game of some sort, or try to go even further, trying to feel a general ambiguity as to the solid volumes of things and forms instead is the instinctive certainty that we typically feel we must know in general what the real constitution of a given object's form is. But this will feel an unnatural exercise to most.