[i]I wandered lonely as a cloud
That floats on high o'er vales and hills,
When all at once I saw a crowd,
A host of golden daffodils;
Beside the lake, beneath the trees,
Fluttering and dancing in the breeze.

Continuous as the stars that shine
and twinkle on the Milky Way,
They stretched in never-ending line
along the margin of a bay:
Ten thousand saw I at a glance,
tossing their heads in sprightly dance.

The waves beside them danced; but they
Out-did the sparkling waves in glee:
A poet could not but be gay,
in such a jocund company:
I gazed—and gazed—but little thought
what wealth the show to me had brought:

For oft, when on my couch I lie
In vacant or in pensive mood,
They flash upon that inward eye
Which is the bliss of solitude;
And then my heart with pleasure fills,
And dances with the daffodils.[/i]



Vitalistic imagination is tied to the senses, to the extent that it attaches itself to them, but it is not hard chained to them, it has a certain freedom of movement via which it can abstract from the sensual, from varied aspects of sensuality, and in doing so form a wholeness or totality that combines [i]them[/i] (the specific sensual elements being used within the poetic metaphor) in ways that wouldn't be possible or make sense if the resulting conception was limited to the senses in the ways the senses typically demand conceptions to conform to their qualities and internal relations*. Likewise, the vitalistic imagination is not simply separate from 'ordinary' or what might be called the non-vitalistic imagination, which would consist in the all the imaginative power that this faculty normally possesses that specifically excludes the power of the vitalistic that potentially augments it; it extends ordinary imagination's powers to relate things to things in multifaceted ways, ways which are simultaneously more organised and more abstracted then what would seem to be possible without it.

*Kant, to the extent that he does, would claim that such internal relations, such as that of sight and the imaginative space that corresponds to it, exist as such that [i]in their specificness and restriction[/i] they are able to form a basis for geometry (at least this is how I choose to interpret his 'a priori' synthetic, which might otherwise seemingly be demolished by Quine's criticisms of it). However, there is a vagueness to our perceptions/imagination (conceived as intuition), and a certain potential freedom of imagination that stems from this, that seems to make this basis questionable. Now, when sight is presented in a way that feels seemingly accurate and rigid—which I term [i]in solidity[/i], in contrast with when it is less accurate and more loosely constructed, and hence less solid—this suggests a certain potential limit, that of the perfectly accurate (which Plato in part conceived of as a member of the Forms) which acts as the limit of the sense of sight were it taken to be as perfectly 'solid' as would conceivably be possible, and hence infinitely detailed. We might imagine that an eagle, who's eyes allow greater resolution than ours, might have vision closer to this (potentially unreachable) ideal than our own. This suggestion of such an ideal, which could be more accurately said to be a basis for 'formally ideal' geometry, is still distinct from the operation of our own visual imagination, considered as it is as experienced by the human mind, though it may allow us a basis from which we can imagine concepts that extend its power, using other faculties of our ordinary imagination in combination with it to form geometric concepts. However, the visual imagination naturally does not seem to be limited to the 'solid perfection' of consistently continuous geometric space as such, it can be constructed in such a way that parts of it lack in information, either because, as in the human blind spot, the construction of the eye doesn't provide this, or because, as some idea is realised in a person's internal imaginative plane, certain details are not provided. Though in both cases, the lack of these details will not even be obvious or apparent unless we specifically draw our attention to their lack, our conception of things within our visual space is hence potentially abstracted quite markedly from 'solidity', though there still seems to be a 2D plane that is apparently consistent in construction (though if this was 'really the case' how would we tell it was anyway?). In a way, our sense of [i]line[/i] may actually be unusually clear due to the (from the perspective of neuroscience and its ability to observe to operations of cells that lead from the eye to the brain) structurally apparent edge detection features that we possess, which may make geometry more intuitive, this clarity and its conceptual structure masking the potential vagueness of the plane itself. But ultimately, the visual sense is plagued by contingency and vagueness, and yet it seems apparently coherent and ordered to us most of the time, at least when our vision is not blurred or distorted and we are not experiencing great degrees of hallucination [INSERT REFERENCES ON FUZZINESS AND HALLUCINATION].

NOTE: Explain the distinction between solidity and 'orderedness'.

So what might this say about the potential freedom the visual plane actually offers, given it seems to only be apparently solidly constructed, and as such allows our imagination an arena in which it can conceive of things which we feel to be coherent despite the lack of specific detail that 'ought' to be present in a coherent sense experience. Such an arena surely allows at least some degree of inherent abstraction, should it not? But, even with the freedom from solidity it does provide, it seem to be not quite enough to account for the actual, metaphorical abstract relations of which vitalistic imagination manages to allow the intuition of. In Wordsworth's famous untitled poem, the totality of the metaphorical 'image' of the daffodils, which are imbued with the qualities of a celebrating crowd, and a galaxy, seems to escape the ability to capture all these associations with purely visual imagination (at least without creating something unnaturally surreal looking). For the 'image'—or the Idea—the poem expresses as a whole is strongly related to many things that naturally leap to us as visual images, the primary one of the actual impression of the daffodils especially so. The mind of the person apprehending the poem as an Idea will not likely be blank of mental imagery of the visual plane if they are naturally, fully and freely using their imagination. So even though I have stated that the Vitalistic Imagination is in some sense distinct from, or at least not identical to, visual imagination, by no means does this mean that someone imagining a poem as an Idea is merely in a completely 'abstract' space bereft of visual imagery with all its colors, shapes and forms.* The full power of that visual imagination, and for that matter, any other kind of imagining, is free to be exercised while contemplating a poem. After all, sound is an integral aspect of poetry, it is the primary means by which it is conveyed, and so it clearly would be silly to hold the the experience of poetry is also entirely abstracted from auditory imagination at least.

* The 'Imagist' school of poetry in particular deliberately takes advantage of this.

The very first line of the poem contains an ambiguity in itself. If we were to consider it as 'ordinary language', we might ask, “Is the poet a lonely wanderer who also somehow happens to be a cloud, floating over vales and hills? Or is he merely a wanderer who's loneliness is like that of a singular cloud?”. [INSERT SEC DISCUSSION] The metaphor seems to lift the poet from being a walking mortal and abstracts him into the sky, where no longer he needs a solid body or eye.

The nature of ambiguity in the poetic should, contrary to the expectations of many, be taken seriously. It is good to consider the specific nature of the abstraction that individual poems provide, as it frequently works not by presenting shear ambiguous vagueness, but by providing highly specific contrasting ideas that relate in surprisingly precise ways. There can be no guarantee that an individual subject receives these ideas in the same way, that they match up specifically with what the poet may have intended or that they even experience language all that similarly due to differences in environment, upbringing etc. But despite this, despite this possibility of genuine ambiguity that results on different perceptions of a work, the specific ways that the poems ideas are received and combined abstractly possess a clarity to them, especially if the poem is good, that it would be a disservice to consider as mere fuzziness, as something that is "sort of either this or that but you can't tell". It is that quality that I believe leads to Schopenhauer referring to the 'chemical' qualities of the poetic, that poetic actions on the imagination potentially have this distilling effect. And it is the Vitalistic Imagination that allows this clarity in this form of relational abstraction.
