I understand why you feel the way to you and don't blame you for feeling that my work is in need of better justification, and I want to correct that issue. I do want to make it clear at this point that I am not sure of what extent my experiences will generalise to other people, and so you should treat most of what I'm saying as hypothesies which have yet to properly be put to the test. I have though, despite this, been writing in such a way that presumes there is more force to what I say than I have provided solid evidence for, but I basically just don't want to bother *couching* everything I say overly tentative language all the time.



Anyway, I welcome criticism and have no issue with people pointing out potential problems with what I'm trying to do, as difficult as that may be given how different people's preferences, experiences and ways of viewing the world are.

So if you are sceptical, I understand, as that is reasonable at this point. But I must object to claims that what I am saying is simply empty, as I hope that I have shown you that this is not the case and that I am making a number of specific preditions, which I am willing to weaken or disregard if there is strong enough evidence against them.


I want to make it clear that I do not believe that I am alone in recognizing the specific kinds of thought processes that I have, or that people differ in their capacity to have them. That more musicaly trained people tend to use the 'voice processing parts' of their brains when listening to music compared to untrained people is something that, it turns out, is supported by a fair amount of research. Likewise, it is widly acknowledged that people brought up in different musical cultures tend to perceive music differently, and it seems reasonble that the former factor would play a significant part in this.

The existance of 'vital metaphor', with the specific experiential qualities I talk about, is something I now realise has been developed by theorists such as Josef Stern and Elisabeth Camp, although the possibilitiy that people may specifically lack the ability to experience it doens't seem to have been explored much.

These are largly things that I didn't know at the outset, when I initially noticed the changes occuring in myself.


That 'Super Grammar' exists and plays a unique role in both the perception of poetic and musical structures is probably the most radical proposal I'm making, and the one with the least evidence, and in accordance with this I understand that a serious demonstration of this would require a much more substantial body of research before I'd expect a significant number of people to accept it. Still, it's important that I throw it out there, as it it both important to the context of everything else I'm claiming and would provide an interesting avenue to explore if it turns out my predictions do generalize significantly. Given that this idea directly contradicts certain aspects of other theories (such as Lerdhal and Jackendoff's prediction that 'grouping structure' is fundumental to everyone's musical perception), this should in principal be testible.

Evidence:

- Encompassing voice is supported by research showing that professional level musical training is associated with linguistic processing of music.

- Vitalistic Imagination is supported by Metaphysics of Metaphor


- SGP predicts that EVP is not necessarily sufficiant to allow a person to perceive grouping structure, contrary to what is predicted by the GTTM.

-Likewise, I predict that a lack of ability to percieve grouping structure should *strongly* correlate to a lack of ability to properly perceive meter in verse poetry.


*The nature of the correlation here is important. If my hypothessis is true, and every human followed a relativly consistant brain structure, I would expect that everyone who is capable of hearing variant structure in music is capable of experiencing vital metaphor, given they haven't lead some kind of freak life in which they were, say, educated in music while being precluded from any given natural language. However, I cannot say with complete and absolute certainty that all humans will always possess such conformity of mental structure, such that it would rule out gross mutations, nor the possibility of entirly different species that may be capable of aesthetic experience in the future, which is a very real possibility. What I do predict though, is that there is possibly some underlying, presumably common, cause that results in SGP/VI arising as it seemingly does in the human species (if other humans do have minds similar enough to my own), and that is what would produce the mental phenomena as it appears. So, while I cannot rule out things occuring differently in other minds, if *it is the case* that the cause of SGP arising in my mind turns out to be the same thing that allows other people to perceive variant structure and vital metaphor, I would expect a vastly higher correlation between those who have/lack either ability having/lacking the other compared to what might be 'normally' expected (in that people who have a particular 'taste' are 'normally' far more likely to live in a class/culture that values education in language arts and music, and hence are far more likely to have appreciation for poetry given advanced musical understanding and vice versa). More specifically, I would expect it to be the case that many people would have a similar experience to myself in possibly living arbitrarily long portions of their lives without the experience of 'large scale' apprehension of either music of poetry, then inadvertedly finding that on attaining one, they posess the other. As such, this theory becomming more well known would increase the chances of finding people who may go through the same process, due to them becomming aware of how myself (and possibly others) have aquired this mental faculty and realizing they might go through the same process before this then happens, and thence "catching it in the act". However, I must apprehensivly admit a recommendation of caution here, of the possibility that some people might get over excited and presume that the things suggested this hypothesis must be true for them despite not having a clear recollection of their own experiences, and then retroactivly reading into their own development such that it conforms to this framework, resulting in less reliable reports.

Anything that relies on self reporting to such an extent will run into similar issues, and because of this I insist that people consider both the benefits and downsides to relying strongly on personal accounts compared to more controlled statistical approaches to psychology. In a meaningful sense, anything that deals with aesthetics will value personal accounts of the nature of such experience, and the science of aesthetics, including what may be considered 'sub-disciplines' like music theory, is most effectivly fueled by the build up of accounts of individuals, and gains traction by the understanding that these seperate accounts do correlate to each other (and possibly also the reader's intuitions) meaningfully, rather than being isolated statements of the individual apprehension of some unique expression (which may still be meaningful, but due to lack of correlation to a wider culture, can't have the possible causes behind it explored in ways that are as significant). This doesn't rule out the merits of more structured research approaches to the subject, which can certainly yeild worthwhile information, but do consider how limited an approach to settling more involved philosophical issues surveying random people is, even if this could be considered 'more scientific' in some sense. To be clear, I do not at all believe that my thesies are exceptions that are somehow above or unamendable to scientific methodology. If people do end up wanting to conduct studies into my hypothesies, then they may live or die via the results of experiments demonstrating that they do or not not generalize in the ways I may predict (or in ways that others may predict based on interpritations of my ideas). However, some caution must be made to recognise the specific qualities of the phenomena I write about and how this might affect the interpretation of any scientific results thereof. For instance, I do not know at this time what proportion of people may sucessfully attain the abilities I propose are possible for a given human to aquire, or how this may be affected by culture, training, upbringing and/or genetics. It may in fact be the case that my experiences are only reflected in a minority of people, for whatever reasons. However, even if this is so, even if there are barely any others who my eludications of my experiences specifically apply to, if what is true for me is true for anyone else at all, then that knowledge has some value to the extent that it has predictive and possibly explanatory power for those people and marks out particular patterns that do have meaning, though it may ultimately be less significant than otherwise if the causes behind it are more sparodic. If it turns out, for instance, that there are alternate methods of attaining the ability to bia one's mind towards the perception of thematic transformations that are 'non-linguistic', then so be it (this whould in fact be exceptionally interesting since it would suggest either a 'common cause' of this kind of perception beyond 'the language faculty' that simply happens to be awakened by it, or that there is some more fundumental reason for such structure to arise in multiple ways), but save for this I'd expect that my expectations about who can perceive thematic transformation and why to hold up, both to the scrutiny of formal experiment, and to the 'social experiment' formed by a musical culture that has expectations of its own about what its participants out to be able to perceive and is capable of asking them to inquire into this and discuss such things amoungst themselves.

...

"The human material on which the demonstration has been
made has so far been rather limited and, in part at least, eccentric,
consisting of unusually suggestible hypnotic subjects, and of
hysteric patients. Yet the elementary mechanisms of our life are
presumably so uniform that what is shown to be true in a marked
degree of some persons is probably true in some degree of all,
and may in a few be true in an extraordinarily high degree."

- William James, The Varieties of Religious Experience

---

You are right to critcise me. Without appropriate evidence you have good reason to have doubts about the claims I've made. Up until now I havn't provided a comprehensive enough set of reasons to believe that my claims can be justified by independent evidence, but that's something I want to amend. There are two basic issues here, one being that I need to provide reason to believe that what I have experienced can and should generalise to other people, and secondly that these theories have practical power to make predictions and be tested.

Everything here starts off from personal experience. I have felt certain things acutely, examined my experiences and noted down what I felt to be most significant about them and how they formed. Then, somewhat surprisingly, on looking at existing works about musical structure I found that much I had come to write matched up directly with existing theories. What I though was 'the key' of a song turned out to be exactly that, so I was confident that I was on the right track about something at least. And, given I had heard reports of other people having similar 'sudden relvelations' about music, it seemed that it was possible that others might go through similar processes as me, and that this was good enough reason to write about this. Relying on such anecdotal evidence alone though will naturally be inadequate for something that I hope to possibly be treated as a systematic explanation, but as a basis and starting point for developing a hypothesis it naturally has the great advantage that allows deep and rich personal exploration of my own experience, and personal experience is what people are really concerned with when it comes to music and art.

But if you are not satisfied with my word on this, than that's fair. That's why I've been looking out for research that might support or deny these conjectures, and I've compiled some resources that I hope will amount to something more convoncing. So far I've also writen up a number of articles which I want to use to demonstrate what aspects of my theory seem to be most strongly supported. For isntance, currently, it seems that a correlation between musical training/apptitude and the tendency to process music in what might be considered the parts of the brain language that deal with language seems to have decently strong support in the literature, and so it may very well be that the specific nature of this may match up with what I have called Encompassing Voice, in which case the idea that certain musical structures result from processing music similarly to language should be testable.

What makes me the most confident that this work might be seriously developed into something with substantial explanitory power, which honestly thrills me, is that what I suspected about WHY certain people may be able to hear structures that others may be unable to turns out to be quite supported by existing research and in part acknowledged by leading theorists. That advanced musical perception seems to be correlated with processing occuring in the parts of the brain that deal with language matches up with what I expected to be the case, I personally felt music become voice-like when all the other structures I noted rose up, and that those particular features might be explained through this is something that should very much be testable.

This alone would be enough reason to support the idea of encompassing voice being a viable idea, but that there seems to be more beyond this, in the form of a further mental ability to be developed that affects both music and poetry similarly (given they are both able to be experienced through the 'language faculty') and allows each of them to be enriched through higher levels of structure provides an even richer set of testible ideas and possible explanations for how human mental processes might be affected. This second faculty is much more tenatative, there is not the same level of established research evidence for it which might show specifically how it might affect the brain, and so being a more radical proposal I respect the need for a higher degree of evidence to show that it is a real phenomena. But still I have every reason to throw it out there and write about it, not in the least because it 'fills in' phenomena that encompassing voice alone otherwise wouldn't explain. On top of this, recently I was delighted to see other people had independently come up with the concept of vital metaphor, meaning that I have assurance others have observed the very same imaginative qualities rising from poetic language that I have and that, like with music, I am observing something come to my mind that has formed the basis of long running cultural traditions.